Verité Research presents key  findings at multiple international fora

Verité Research, building on its international reputation, strengthened its global presence in October by delivering high-level presentations at over half a dozen international forums and events.

These engagements included a conference by the Centre for International Private Enterprise (CIPE) in Washington DC, sessions connected to the United Nations General Assembly Meetings in New York, the 8th Global Debt Conference (DebtCon) at the University of Georgetown, sessions connected to the 2025 Annual Meetings of the World Bank Group (WBG) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in Washington, DC, the Barclays Bank Capital Market Investors Forum and the Devex Impact House sessions.

Engaging in these events over a span of one month, Verité Research also held one-on-one discussions with a number of academics in New York and Washington DC, as well as senior leaders of the World Bank and the IMF. The think tank was represented by two of its Directors, Dr. Nishan de Mel and Inoshini Perera, as well as its Lead Economist Raj Prabu Rajakulendran. Georgetown University Professor Shanta Devarajan, who is a Non-Resident Fellow of Verité Research, also joined some of the high-level engagements.

At the debt conference in Washington DC, Verité Research once again shared the theory and practice of the Governance-Linked Bonds (GLBs) that it designed in 2023, to improve outcomes for all stakeholders in Sri Lanka’s debt restructuring. In the class of sovereign-issued ESG (environmental, social, and governance) bonds, this innovation by Verité Research is the first G-bond to be issued in the world. Verité Research is now engaged in discussion with various organisations to further globalise the issuing of GLBs.

Both in New York and Washington DC, Verité Research also took forward its assistance to other debt distressed countries by engaging with Kenyan organisations in public sessions to further the understanding of how Kenya’s economic difficulties could be better overcome by focusing on improved governance – a position that is being strongly advocated by Verité Research at a global level.