11th Belt and Road Summit concludes successfully in Hong Kong, China

Secretary for Commerce and Economic Development Algernon Yau delivered welcome remarks at the Thematic Breakout Session “Chinese Mainland Enterprises Going Global: Driving Mutual Growth Across Belt and Road Economies”

Two-day event with strong interest from Central Asia and Middle East unlocks new business potential

The 11th Belt and Road Summit, co-organised by the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and the Hong Kong Trade Development Council (HKTDC), concluded successfully last week.

The two-day Summit under the theme “Advancing High Quality Development, Embarking on a New Journey,” attracted over 6,200 political and business leaders from over 70 countries and regions, showcased over 300 investment projects, arranged more than 800 one-on-one deal-making meetings, and facilitated more than 60 Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs).

Sri Lanka was represented by Trade, Commerce, Food Security and Cooperative Development Minister Wasantha Samarasinghe who also figured in a policy dialogue titled ‘Building Resilient Trade and Investment Frameworks in a Diverse Global Landscape.’ Qatar State Minister for Foreign Trade Affairs Dr. Ahmed bin Mohammed Al-Sayed, Thailand Vice Minister for Commerce Dr. Kirida Bhaopichitr, Bangladesh Minister for Commerce and Industries Khandakar Abdul Muktadir, Kazakhstan Trade Minister Arman Shakkaliyev, and Timor-Leste Commerce and Industry Minister Filipus Nino Pereira were associated with Minister Samarasinghe.

The BRI Summit was inaugurated by People’s Republic of China Hong Kong Special Administrative Region CEO John KC Lee. Among the global leaders in attendance were Uzbekistan Prime Minister Abdulla Aripov, Uruguay Vice President Carolina Cosse, and Laos Deputy Prime Minister Saleumxay Kommasith.

This year’s Summit focused on business globalisation, new market opportunities, and cross-regional cooperation, promoting exchanges and collaboration between the government and business sectors, creating opportunities for enterprises to expand into international markets, while deepening Hong Kong›s economics and trade ties with emerging markets such as ASEAN, Central Asia, and the Middle East, underscoring Hong Kong›s unique role as a super connector and super value-adder.

In response to the accelerating pace of Chinese Mainland enterprises expanding into overseas markets, the Summit introduced the GoGlobal Chapter for the first time, becoming one of the highlights of this year’s event. The Chapter encompassed thematic sessions, the GoGlobal Connect Zone, roundtable discussions, and the GoGlobal Business Study Mission, providing a one-stop exchange and matchmaking platform for enterprises looking to explore overseas markets. In particular, the thematic breakout session held yesterday, titled “Chinese Mainland Enterprises Going Global: Driving Mutual Growth Across Belt and Road Economies”, featured welcome remarks by Secretary for Commerce and Economic Development Algernon Yau, as well as sharing of practical experience by representatives from several Chinese Mainland enterprises and Hong Kong professional services enterprises, who explored how to connect with international markets through Hong Kong.

During the Summit, the GoGlobal Connect Zone attracted numerous enterprises seeking Hong Kong professional services partners, exploring market channels, and grasping investment and cooperation opportunities, further demonstrating Hong Kong’s advantage as the preferred platform for Chinese Mainland enterprises expanding into international markets. Shaanxi TIRAIN Science & Technology Co., Ltd. from mainland and Deloitte Advisory (Hong Kong) Ltd.

signed a MoU, with both parties set to collaborate on going global. Shaanxi TIRAIN

Science & Technology Co., Ltd., President Chen Li, said: “Given the current global economic climate, going global is a natural choice for us. We have entered into an agreement with Deloitte precisely because we value their expertise in global tax, legal and labour consultancy. Combining our technological and product strengths with Deloitte’s global support will enable us to ensure compliance and maintain a sound credit standing, thereby enhancing our competitiveness and enabling us to go further on the global stage.”

Deepening ties with Central Asia and the Middle East, expanding cross-regional cooperation opportunities

Building on the outcomes of Chief Executive John Lee’s visit to Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan in June this year, the Summit introduced a dedicated Central Asia Chapter and Central Asia Zone this year to further deepen Hong Kong’s business and trade ties with Central Asian markets. The Summit brought together government officials, business leaders, and investors from the Central Asian region to exchange views and share the latest development opportunities and investment prospects. Key development projects such as Kazakhstan’s Alatau City and Data Centre Valley attracted participants’ interest in related investment and cooperation opportunities.  Republic of Kazakhstan, Artificial Intelligence and Digital Development Deputy Minister Bakhtiyar

Mukhametkaliyev said: “Kazakhstan has a strong aerospace foundation. The sector combines research institutions, laboratories, satellites, assembly and testing capabilities, and the Baikonur Cosmodrome. We are developing a satellite system and digital platform for agriculture, land use, emergency response, and resource management.”

At the same time, the Summit further strengthened its Middle East elements through the Middle East Chapter, Middle East Zone, and multiple thematic sessions, helping enterprises grasp the latest developments and investment opportunities in the Middle East region. The Business Plenary, themed “Unlocking New Market Opportunities along and beyond the Belt and Road”, focused on the Middle East and African markets.

Speakers from Qatar, Oman, South Africa, and Nigeria shared insights on the enormous potential of emerging markets along and beyond the Belt and Road amid the evolving global business landscape, and explored how Hong Kong can help global enterprises seize new market opportunities. Additionally, the Project Investment Session, New Market Focus: The Middle East, Africa, and Latin America, invited political and business representatives from Brazil, Egypt, Morocco, Oman, and South Africa to share developments in their key industries, helping enterprises grasp the latest investment opportunities and expand their international cooperation networks.

Furthermore, at Signature Projects Session on the second day, Republic of Türkiye of Transport

and Infrastructure Deputy Minister Enver İskurt introduced the large-scale Ankara-Istanbul super speed railway infrastructure project, and said: “Turkey is a secure hub that has continued to pursue its projects with determination despite global uncertainties and geopolitical tensions. Hong Kong-based investors, financial institutions, and engineering firms can play an active role at every stage of our projects, from financing to engi neering solutions, particularly in the railway investments we have prioritised in recent times.”

Facilitating project matchmaking and industrial cooperation to drive business opportunities

Through the Project Investment Session, the Belt and Road Deal-Making, and Exhibition Zones, this year’s Summit showcased over 300 investment projects, with a total project value exceeding $ 5.4 billion, and arranged more than 800 one-on-one deal-making meetings, helping enterprises precisely connect with potential partners.

Among the MoUs facilitated by this year’s Summit was one involving Jabal Asset Management LLC of Oman.Jabal Asset Management

Member Issa Al Battashi said: “We feel that the Summit as a whole is an opportunity to connect capital, institutions and retail investors across these markets. We believe that if we are able to keep creating dialogue and forming meaningful partnerships, we should see a lot of this translate into positive results in the near future.”

The Exhibition Zones, including the Hong Kong Zone, Global Investment Zone, Chinese Mainland Zone, and ASEAN Zone, featured more than 120 exhibitors. This year, new zones were added, including the University Zone, GreenTech Zone, and GoGlobal Connect Zone, showcasing research achievements, innovative technologies, green solutions, and professional services resources to drive cross-industry and cross-regional cooperation.

Building on forum success, ASEAN Market Day helps SMEs unlock new business opportunities through consultation sessions

As a new highlight of Belt and Road Week, the ASEAN Market Day received an enthusiastic response, attracting 340 SMEs who gained in-depth understanding of the latest development trends and business opportunities in the ASEAN market, further extending the exchange outcomes of the forum. The event featured dedicated consultation sessions, allowing participants to engage in face-to-face in-depth discussions with representatives from HKTDC’s ASEAN offices, various ASEAN Consulates General and associations, enabling precise alignment with enterprises’ overseas expansion needs.

The HKTDC will launch more thematic promotion activities for high-potential markets, including GoGBA Development Day, African Market Day, and Middle East Market Day, to assist Hong Kong enterprises, particularly SMEs, in seizing new global development opportunities.

Although the Summit has concluded successfully, cooperation negotiations will continue, and a series of follow-up activities will continue to drive cooperation implementation.

The Belt and Road Deal-Making was extended to 14-15 September in an online format, continuing to provide enterprises with business matching and cooperation opportunities. The Belt and Road Global Forum Annual Roundtable 2026 brought together representatives from Hong Kong, Chinese Mainland, and international chambers of commerce and organisations to discuss the latest market development trends and deepen regional exchanges and cooperation.

The ASEAN Market Day brought together multiple business leaders and industry experts with deep roots in the ASEAN market, as well as representatives from ASEAN Consulates General in Hong Kong, joining hands to help Hong Kong enterprises capture business opportunities in the region

The Central Asia Chapter brought together government officials and business leaders from the Central Asian region to share the latest development opportunities and investment prospects

This year›s Summit arranged over 800 one-on-one deal-making meetings, helping project owners, investors, and professional services institutions establish partnerships

The Summit introduced the GoGlobal Chapter for the first time this year, bringing together business leaders and professional services representatives to explore new opportunities for enterprises expanding into overseas markets

The GoGlobal Connect Zone attracted numerous enterprises seeking professional service partners, market channels, and investment and cooperation opportunities

The Middle East Chapter focused on new development opportunities in the Middle East market, attracting representatives from regional governments, investment institutions, and enterprises to exchange views

Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Chief Executive John KC Lee

Trade, Commerce, Food Security and Cooperative Development Minister Wasantha Samarasinghe

The 11th Belt and Road Summit concluded successfully, bringing together political and business leaders, investors, and professionals from over 70 countries and regions worldwide to explore Belt and Road cooperation opportunities