New Chinese Envoy arrives, vows to strengthen bilateral ties

Colombo, Aug. 11 (Daily Mirror) - Newly appointed Chinese Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to Sri Lanka, H.E. Wei Huaxiang, arrived in Sri Lanka to assume his post, pledging to strengthen the longstanding friendship and expand mutually beneficial cooperation between China and Sri Lanka.

Ambassador Wei delivered a written speech upon his arrival at the airport, describing his appointment by Chinese President Xi Jinping as a “great honor and privilege” and expressing his admiration for Sri Lanka, its rich civilisation, scenic beauty and people.

He highlighted the long history of relations between the two countries, tracing their links to ancient maritime trade and the historic Silk Road. He also referred to the Rubber-Rice Pact signed more than 70 years ago as an important example of mutual support and solidarity between the two countries.

The Ambassador said China-Sri Lanka relations had continued to deepen since the establishment of diplomatic ties, including through cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative and in areas such as water technology and education.

He said Chinese President Xi Jinping met President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya during their respective visits to China in 2025, adding that the high-level engagements had provided new strategic direction for the development of bilateral relations.

“China always takes Sri Lanka as a priority in its neighborhood diplomacy,” he said, noting that both countries were currently focusing on economic development and improving people’s livelihoods.

Ambassador Wei said China was ready to work closely with Sri Lanka to strengthen the alignment of development strategies, promote mutual success and deepen the strategic cooperative partnership between the two countries.

He said the coming year would be particularly significant, as China and Sri Lanka will mark the 70th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations and the 75th anniversary of the signing of the Rubber-Rice Pact.

“I am deeply aware of the glorious mission and significant responsibility this entails,” Ambassador Wei said, pledging that he and his colleagues would work to carry forward the traditional friendship between the two countries, expand mutually beneficial cooperation and safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of Chinese institutions and citizens in Sri Lanka.

He also called for closer communication and cooperation with stakeholders from both countries and welcomed their views and suggestions to further strengthen bilateral relations.

“Let us join hands and make unremitting efforts to usher in a brighter future for China-Sri Lanka relations,” he said.