More than 60,000 SL students pursuing British degree programmes through UK-accredited local institutions – British H. C.

‘Sri Lanka is an important market for British educational institutes, with more than 60000 students pursuing British degree programmes here through UK-accredited local educational institutions, British High Commissioner to Sri Lanka Andrew Patrick said.

‘UK university degree-accredited institutes are operating worldwide and those degree programmes are adjusted to suit changing global job market conditions, H.C. Patrick added.

The H.C. made these comments at the official launch of the Centre for International Education (CIE) and Awards for Training and Higher Education (ATHE) institute of UK, organised by Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing (SLIM). The event was held at Cinnamon Lakeside Colombo recently.

He said that CIE, the dedicated international education arm of SLIM, will paved the way for globally recognised education and international career opportunities for Sri Lankan students.

The HC while emphasising the importance of going abroad for education and employment to obtain global exposure, requested Sri Lankan students to come back to Sri Lanka and support the local economy.

‘It creates new opportunities, builds pathways to excellence and prepares students to succeeded on the international stage, he added.

Guest of Honour, Alex Berkshire, Chief Executive at ATHE said that international qualifications are essential to equip students for today’ competitive global landscape, while CIE creates clear pathway for learners to achieve academic excellence and open doors to rewarding opportunities worldwide.

SLIM president, Prof Dewasiri N. Jayantha emphasised the institution’s vision for global education and professional excellence.

Chevron Lanka exceeds LKR 4 billion in earnings for the first time in 32-year history

Parliament rocked by LKR 13.2 billion NDB fraud: Systemic failure or regulatory lapse?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.