The United States celebrated  250 years of freedom on the Fourth of July in spectacular style

July 4, 2026 marked the 250th anniversary of the Declaration of Independence by the Second Continental Congress in 1776, announcing that the 13 American colonies free from British rule.

The first July 4 celebrations were hardly as elaborate as those of the present day, the main theme being mock funerals for King George III, who was King of England at the time.

July 4 was also called Freedom Day, a gross misnomer. President Barack Obama brought the significance of the date into perspective, while a self-educated slave described eloquently what July 4 meant to the African-American, then, and even to some extent, today.

President Obama said, “Out of the fire and steel of a revolution, a declaration was made that we are all created equal, endowed by our creator with certain inalienable rights, and in the newly independent United States, there will be no kings or lords, no serfs or subjects, but only citizens, each of us free to pursue our own version of happiness and determine our collective fate through an elected representative government.

“The success of this experiment was never a given. The founders fell terribly short of the Declaration’s promise, leaving slavery intact, allowing the states to restrict the franchise to white men”.

But they did have the foresight to provide a framework to make the union and democracy more perfect as the years went by. Sadly, a framework that is proving to be too fragile to protect citizens’ rights and their democracy in the hands of the most evil white supremacists from the good old days of slavery, which, according to them, did not exist. People in power with the mentality of the founders, to whom the words “We the people” encompassed white men only.

The danger to the US constitution, to its very democracy, has never before been threatened by a band of such 19th century robber barons, who have amassed unprecedented wealth through monopolistic practices and the exploitation of labor, fully supported by the most corrupt administration in history.

An amazing fact was revealed the other day, that President Trump and his family have made $1.4 billion (with a B) by fraudulent practices, primarily through crypto currency ventures, lucrative foreign business deals, entertainment rights and legal settlements. Activities completely against emoluments clause of the constitution. Does he receive forgiveness from the Almighty Lord for the sale of $99 leather-bound Trump bibles, as they spread the Word, even though these bibles are made by “starving Chinese peasants”, according to Vice-President Vance?

Not content with abusing the treasury, the constitution, even the judiciary, Trump and his oligarchs are now trying to whitewash the history of the USA by instructing institutions like the Smithsonian, the world’s largest museum, education and research complex, to rewrite the history of the nation. An abhorrent task for an institution dedicated to the “increase and diffusion of knowledge”, and with other affiliate organizations, to “create experiences that educate and inspire”.

The Trump administration is putting pressure on the Smithsonian to reshape the truth behind American history, and “to force the museum to align with a more flattering narrative of America’s past”. For example, the administration has altered Donald Trump’s portrait plaque to omit details of his two impeachments. And, according to the wisdom of Florida Governor, Ron DeSantis, slavery was a “job training program:”

The Smithsonian Secretary Lonnie Bunch has pushed back, “defending the integrity of their work and reaffirming the institution’s 180-year-old commitment to independent, non-partisan, fact-based scholarship”. Words that are Greek to the Trump administration. Trump has predictably threatened to withdraw federal funding from the institution, based on disagreements of its “factual”, historical programming. Trump prefers a version of history that ignores the genocide of the native American and the horrors of centuries of racism and slavery, which even today has been abolished by law only.

Perhaps the real meaning of July Fourth to the African-American lies in the extracts of perhaps the greatest abolitionist speech, given by Frederick Douglass, on July 4, 1952, before a crowd of white abolitionists in Rochester, New York. A self-educated slave who led the abolitionist movement in the 1850s, Douglass’ words are resonant even to this day:

“Fellow citizens, pardon me, allow me to ask, why am I called upon to speak here today? What have I, or those I represent, to do with your national independence? Are the great principles of political freedom and natural justice, embodied in that Declaration of Independence, extended to us? And am I, therefore, called upon to bring our humble offering to the national altar, and to confess the benefits and express devout gratitude for the blessings resulting from your independence to us?

“But such is not the case. I say it with a sad sense of disparity between us. I am not included within the pale of this glorious anniversary. Your high independence only reveals the immeasurable distance between us. The blessings in which you, this day, rejoice, are not enjoyed in common. The rich inheritance of justice, liberty, prosperity and independence, bequeathed by your fathers, is shared by you, not by me. The sunlight that brought light and healing to you, has brought stripes and death to me. This Fourth July is yours, not mine, You may rejoice, I must mourn.

“The power that gave you the Declaration of independence shows America “false to the past, false to the present and solemnly herself to be false to the future”. A power that gave you the license to subjugate 3 million slaves”.

Today, that political power is used to support and perpetuate the poverty of a minimum of 30 million of Americans and sometimes illegally suppress their rights, even kill them for no crime other than having the “wrong” skin color or accent. Due Process are words of irrelevance to the Department of Homeland Security, whose previous Director, Kristi Noem, could not identify the meaning of the common legal words “habeas corpus” before a congressional committee.

Trump had promised that he would put an end to the wars raging in the Gaza and Ukraine on the very first day of the second term of his presidency. In fact. he claimed he had brought peace in countries whose names he could not pronounce, those whose locations were far apart, even those conflicts which had been settled years ago.

Trump gave his Fourth of July presidential address in the spectacular foothills of the Mount Rushmore National Memorial in the Black Hills of Dakota, on the eve of the 250th anniversary of the Declaration of Independence. The 28-minute address was given in the backdrop of fireworks and lights display, and a low-altitude flyover of Air Force 1. After the usual narcissistic version of his achievements and the greatness of America, he warned of a resurgence of the Joe McCarthy, anti-communism era of the 1950s, calling it the “communist menace” as a mortal threat to American freedom.

He also discussed his strategies for the upcoming US midterm elections where he intends to restrict the voting rights of minorities. Especially those who rely on mail-in voting as there is no federal law that requires voters be allowed time off to cast their ballot. As many as 27 functioning democracies hold elections during weekends, and of the seven which hold elections on regular weekdays, only the UK and the USA do not provide guaranteed paid time off to vote.

Donald Trump himself has always used the mail-in voting facility, as he is loath to miss any valuable time of grifting and golfing. He used the rest of the time of his address to warn the country threat of communism, which his low IQ brain has confused with Democratic Socialism, practiced by every other developed country in the world.

At a post-independence speech during the NATO Leaders summit in Ankara, Turkey, in front of leaders of NATO, Trump accused “the Islamic Republic of Japan” of firing 111 missiles at the US aircraft carrier, the USS Abraham Lincoln in the environs of the strait of Hormuz. Trump’s gaffes are world renowned, but the word of the President of the United States has to be taken seriously at all times. These comments alarmed many Japanese men to briefly check if Trump had used his magic to convert Japan to Islam and ensure their foreskins remained intact.

However, after four plus one and half years of Republican (Trumpian) administrative corruption, there are signs that the Democratic Socialist movement, espoused by all developed nations in the world bar the richest, is gaining in strength. Their enemies of the most fair and just system of governance are a motley group of power, wealth and cowardice, groups represented by Trump and the MAGA (Make America Great Again) radical conservatives, the oligarchs, represented by Musk, Bezos, Zuckerberg and other hundreds of thousands of billionaires, even the spineless center-of-the road (radical conservative) Republicans and Democrats who have been scared to death by Trump’s insane rhetoric about Communists. And, of course, that vast number of wealthy Americans who make enough money for two generations, who are reluctant to help those who are needy or vulnerable, for whatever reason.

The undying movement, started by President Frederick Roosevelt, resumed by Senator Bernie Sanders, and gaining in popularity amongst voters of both Parties led by Rep Alexandra Ocasio-Cortez (AOC) and Mayor Mamdani of New York, is gaining in momentum. An honest midterms election will see a rout of the Republican Party, which Trump will never accept and will challenge with violence.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.