BASL adopts LankaSign digital signatures to advance transformation of legal sector

From left: BASL Assistant Secretary Sarinda Jayawardhene, Treasurer Pasindu Silva, Secretary Chathura Galhena, President Rajeev Amarasuriya, LankaPay CEO Channa de Silva, Central Bank of Sri Lanka Assistant Governor/National Certification Authority (NCA) Taskforce Co-Chair Chaminda Bandara, Electronic Transactions Act Architect/NCA Taskforce Co-Chair Jayantha Fernando, and LankaPay Deputy CEO Dinuka Perera along with other officials of the BASL

Marking a significant milestone in the digital transformation of Sri Lanka’s legal sector, the Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) has adopted LankaSign Digital Signatures, enabled by LankaPay, to digitally sign electronic documents to drive digital transformation in the legal profession.

To commemorate this landmark initiative, several key office bearers of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka were ceremoniously handed over highly secure LankaSign digital signature tokens on 5 January 2026 at the premises of the Bar Association.

The event was graced by several distinguished personalities, including Bar Association of Sri Lanka President Rajeev Amarasuriya, Secretary Chathura Galhena, Treasurer Pasindu Silva, Assistant Secretary Sarinda Jayawardhene, Central Bank of Sri Lanka Assistant Governor/ National Certification Authority (NCA) Taskforce Co-Chair Chaminda Bandara, Electronic Transactions Act Architect/NCA Taskforce Co-Chair Jayantha Fernando, LankaPay CEO Channa de Silva and Deputy CEO Dinuka Perera along with other officials of the BASL and representatives from LankaPay.

Digital signatures would play a key role in the digitalisation of the legal system by enabling legal professionals to sign electronic documents anytime, anywhere, delivering unprecedented convenience and efficiency. In addition, digital signatures allow for the secure electronic sharing, archiving, and retrieval of documents, significantly reducing reliance on physical paperwork. Importantly, they provide an enhanced layer of security through authentication, non-repudiation, and data integrity, which are paramount requirements for legal documentation and proceedings.

Bar Association of Sri Lanka President Rajeev Amarasuriya said: “This initiative represents a significant step towards the digitalisation of the legal profession. The use of secure digital signatures will improve efficiency, reduce reliance on physical documentation, and strengthen trust in electronic legal processes. BASL is happy to provide leadership to this transition in collaboration with LankaPay, supporting the vision of seeing a truly digitised legal system.”

LankaPay CEO Channa de Silva said: “It is our pleasure to note that BASL has taken a very progressive step to adopt LankaSign digital signatures, marking an important step in embracing secure digital communication within the legal fraternity. LankaPay is happy to support BASL by providing digital signature tokens to its office bearers, which symbolises our shared commitment to a future-ready legal ecosystem, becoming an integral part of the country’s broader digitalisation journey. We commend BASL for this progressive move in supporting legal professionals to operate within a digitally enabled legal ecosystem in Sri Lanka.”

As the apex professional body representing over 26,000+ legal professionals islandwide, the Bar Association of Sri Lanka recognises its responsibility to prepare its membership to operate effectively within a fully digitalised judicial ecosystem. The introduction of digital signatures to the BASL marks the first phase of a broader rollout that will be extended to the Association’s wider membership in due course.

This collaboration with LankaSign underscores BASL’s commitment to embracing secure, trusted, and nationally governed digital solutions in support of Sri Lanka’s evolving legal and judicial landscape.