CNCI Achiever Awards 2025

Recognition of Award Winners of “CNCI Achiever Awards 2025” for industrial excellence was held in Cinnamon Life, City of Dreams, Colombo on 23 October 2025. This event is annually organised by the Ceylon National Chamber of Industries (CNCI), an Industrial Chamber in the country to recognise and reward the Sri Lankan industrialists for their achievements and excellence displayed in the manufacturing and service sectors.

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya graced the occasion as the Chief Guest. Addressing the gathering she said, “A micro-level enterprise of today can be a giant business in a few years if it progresses on the correct track. CNCI will be a great source of strength in bringing about a more enabling environment, especially for the SME sector.” Prime Minister added, “We must support their expansions, innovations and motivate them to penetrate into new markets. Hence recognition through awards of this nature is extremely important in encouraging our local industries. CNCI has been a dedicated service facilitator, supporter, and promoter for all the manufacturing and service sectors in the country.”

Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handunneththi, Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe and Ambassador of the Republic of Türkiye Semih Lutfu Turgut, participated as Special Guests.

Distinguished gathering of more than 500 participants, including top corporate sector industrialists, Government officials, foreign ambassadors, diplomats, industrial sector representatives, and award winners, joined to witness the grand event of the CNCI Achiever Awards 2025.

CNCI Chairman Pradeep Kahawalage delivered the welcome speech. In his statement, he mentioned that, “Industrialists in Sri Lanka should be given ‘pride of place’ as they are a vital facet of nation’s success and they generate employment providing a higher standard of living to society.”

CNCI Secretary General Major General (Retd.) Samantha Wickaramsena, delivered the vote of thanks.