At least four dead, 17 still missing after collapse of unfinished hotel in Philippines

euro news - Officials said up to 70 people were employed at the construction site, though most had gone home for the weekend.

The death toll rose to four on Monday after the collapse of a hotel under construction near the Philippine capital, with more than a dozen people still believed missing, authorities said.

Two workers pinned beneath the wreckage were found alive after the nine-storey structure gave way on Sunday, hitting a nearby hotel and killing a Malaysian guest.

But two workers trapped at the site in Angeles, north of the capital Manila, died despite rescue efforts.

"The first of the two was pulled out alive, but unfortunately, his body gave out and he did not survive. Doctors could not resuscitate him," regional fire bureau spokeswoman Maria Leah Sajili told the AFP news agency.

"The other one suffered a cardiac arrest around 3:00 am. Doctors could not attend to him as he was still pinned down," she added.

Crews pulled another corpse from the rubble on Monday, but it was not immediately clear if the unidentified body belonged to a person listed among the missing, rescuers said in an updated toll.

Due to the uncertainty, authorities said approximately 17 other people were still considered missing, mostly construction workers who were sleeping at the building site when disaster struck.

Lea Casilao, girlfriend of a missing construction worker, told AFP she had taken a bus from her northern Manila home to Angeles with rice and canned goods on Sunday, unaware of the pre-dawn accident on the same day.

"It's very difficult, it is breaking my heart to wait for something uncertain," 47-year-old Casilao said, crying as she recounted how she slept alone at a local government building overnight Sunday.

Stephanie Batar and her mother Noby told AFP they only learned about the accident on social media from their home in nearby Bulacan province early on Monday and have been unable to contact her 64-year-old father who had been hired only weeks earlier at the job site on a six-month contract.

"I couldn't breathe. I couldn't stand. It's very painful and we did not know what to do," the daughter said.

Regional labour department director Geraldine Panlilio said she had briefly shut the project down in September 2024 over violations of occupational safety standards.

"Our labour inspectors had monitored poor working conditions, a violation that would put our workers at risk," she said in an interview over Manila radio station DZMM.

The construction workers "lacked safety gear" like hardhats, boots, safety belts and lifelines, and worked under poor lighting and with no visible safety signages, she added.

Construction resumed a month later after the building contractor complied with requirements, Panlilio said.

Officials said up to 70 people were employed at the construction site, though most had gone home for the weekend.

Alfredo Albis, 55, told AFP he was asleep at a barracks for workers about five metres from the structure when it gave way.

"I have two cousins who are still trapped there. They were working here to earn for their families and (they) are missing," he said, adding "there's a possibility that my relatives are dead."

Sajili, the fire bureau spokeswoman, said that "rescue in (a) building collapse is very challenging since any sudden shift triggered by the movements of our rescuers can cause areas to move and people under can get crushed."

If no more survivors are found after a search with thermal scanners, mechanical diggers and other heavy equipment will be brought in to clear debris and recover bodies, she said, but gave no timeline.