LIMRA Holdings among Top 40 Outstanding Companies

LIMRA Holdings Limited, one of Sri Lanka’s most diversified and quietly ambitious conglomerates, has earned a landmark double recognition at the Best Management Practices Company Awards 2026 held recently.

LIMRA Holdings was named among the Top 40 Outstanding Companies in Sri Lanka and awarded Gold in the People and HR Governance ESG cluster – two distinctions that reflect the quality and discipline of its operations across a multi-sector portfolio spanning more than three decades.

Organised by the Institute of Chartered Professional Managers of Sri Lanka (CPM Sri Lanka), the Best Management Practices Company Awards evaluate Sri Lankan public and private sector organisations on the rigour of their leadership, strategy, people management, partnerships, processes, and performance outcomes. In 2026, 170 leading Sri Lankan companies participated in the award competition.

Founded in 1993 and headquartered in Colombo, LIMRA Holdings connects homes and boardrooms across South and Southeast Asia to some of the world’s most trusted brands. The group has spent more than three decades building a formidable portfolio across seven subsidiaries spanning cybersecurity, consumer goods, enterprise technology, AI ventures, and energy with a regional presence across South and Southeast Asia. It helps clients from various industry domains build and operate their own capabilities across enterprise cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, government technology, and digital platforms. Global partnerships with

Fortinet, ESET, Nutanix, Zoho and Qualys extend that reach further. Additionally, it brings the world’s most trusted consumer brands such as LEGO, Barbie, Hot Wheels, and Farlin into Sri Lankan homes.

HNB Life unveils “Wing for Life” campaign to mark bold new chapter and 25 years of trusted protection

‘Beyond EPF: Why Sri Lanka’s professional class needs a retirement revolution’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.