Carrots for hair growth

Lots of us tend to have problems with our hair … wondering how to have a good hair growth.

This week I’ve worked out a few remedies for you to try out – carrot hair masks.

You will need 01 carrot, 02 tablespoons of olive oil, 01 onion, and 02 tablespoons of lemon juice.

Cut the onion and carrot into tiny pieces, and process them in a food processor. Add the lemon juice and olive oil to this paste and then apply it to your hair and leave it for 15 minutes.

You will need 02 carrots, ½ avocado, and 02 tablespoons of honey.

Cut the two carrots into small pieces and, together with the half avocado, blend them into a paste. Add the honey and stir until a smooth consistency is reached.

Apply this paste to your scalp, and hair, rubbing it in for 30 minutes, and then wash it off with a gentle shampoo.

Cut the carrot into small chunks and mix it in a food processor. Then add the coconut oil and make a thick paste.

Give your scalp and hair a thorough application of this mask, let it sit for 20 minutes, and then use a mild shampoo to wash it off.

You will need 02 carrots, 04-05 pieces of ripe papaya, and 02 tablespoons of yoghurt.

Cut the carrots into small pieces and, in a food processor, blend the carrot pieces with the papaya and yoghurt until you obtain a smooth paste.

Apply the mask to your scalp and hair and let it sit for 30 minutes, and then wash it off, using a gentle shampoo.

You will need 01 carrot, 02 tablespoons yoghurt, and 01 banana.

Cut the carrots and bananas into tiny pieces and blend them, in a food processor, with the yoghurt.

Cover your entire head with this mask, then cover it with a shower cap, and let it sit for 30 minutes. Use a gentle shampoo to wash it off.

Awakening a Generation: Mentoring Sri Lanka’s Youth for Purpose and Progress

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.