Akram Cassim re-elected as SLGJA President for 3rd term

From left: Incoming office bearers Shezmin Mansoor, Razni Haniffa, Shezard Careem, Akram Cassim, Shezan Mansoor, Nawrooz Azmi and Amanda Wijemanne From left: Incoming office bearers Shezmin Mansoor, Razni Haniffa, Shezard Careem, Akram Cassim, Shezan Mansoor, Nawrooz Azmi and Amanda Wijemanne

Akram Cassim was re-elected as President of the Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association (SLGJA) for a third term, at the association’s Annual General Meeting (AGM) held this week.

The AGM also elected a new board representing a strong mix of youth and experience, bringing together the members from across the gem, jewellery and lapidary sectors and from key gem and jewellery regions of Sri Lanka.

Joining Cassim in the new leadership team are Shezan Mansoor as Vice President and COO, Shezard Careem as Head of Jewellery Segment, Razni Haniffa as Head of Gem Segment, Amanda Wijemanne as Head of Lapidary Segment, Shezmin Munsoor as Head of Promotions and FACETS and Nawrooz Azmi as Head of Finance.

Cassim said he was delighted with the composition of the new board and its broad representation across the industry.

“We have a well-balanced board combining experience with a new generation of industry leaders, representing the different sectors and regions that make up Sri Lanka’s gem and jewellery industry. I believe this gives us a strong team to address the challenges before us, bring fresh ideas to the table and take the industry forward together.”

In his address to the AGM, Cassim highlighted industry reform as a key priority, including continued engagement with the Industries Ministry, NGJA, EDB, Customs and other relevant authorities on tax, fiscal and regulatory matters.

He noted the progress made on the importation of rough gemstones while identifying the liberalisation of gold imports as an important next step in supporting jewellery manufacturing and value-added exports.

He also highlighted the continued development of FACETS Sri Lanka, traceability, gem and jewellery tourism and greater participation by the younger generation as priorities for the association.

Looking ahead to FACETS Sri Lanka 2027, its 34th edition, Cassim called on the entire industry to support the exhibition by bringing international buyers and sponsors to Sri Lanka and using their global networks to further strengthen the show.

He also welcomed Gübelin Gem Lab as an official partner of FACETS 2027.

With the SLGJA marking its 25th anniversary next year, Cassim said the milestone was an opportunity to celebrate the association’s achievements while setting an ambitious direction for the future.

“We have a proud heritage, a remarkable industry and tremendous potential. With confidence, ambition and shared purpose, we can strengthen Sri Lanka’s position on the world stage.”

He summed up the association’s direction for the year ahead in three words: “One industry, one vision, one voice”.

Meanwhile, Vice President and COO Shezan Mansoor added, “I believe, with the collective support and participation of our membership, under the guidance and leadership of the new board, we can continue to strengthen the association and move forward together - better and stronger.”

SLGJA board 2026-27: 1. Akram Cassim – President, 2. Shezan Mansoor – Vice President | COO, 3. Amanda Wijemanne – Vice President – Lapidary, 4. Shezard Careem – Vice President – Jewellery, 5. Razni Haniffa – Vice President – Gem Segment, 6. Nawrooz Azmi – Vice President – Finance, 7. Shezmin Mansoor – Vice President – Promotions, 8. D. Balasubramanium – Assistant Vice President – Operations, 9. Ashfaq Deen – Assistant Vice President – Finance

Board Directors : 10. Sellakumar Kandasamy, 11. Pinsiri Wijepala, 12. Armil Samoon, 13. Himas Isab, 14. Priyantha Silva, 15. Firaz Hamid, 16. Muslim Salahaudeen, 17. Punsiri Tennakoon, 18. Rizvan Sahabdeen, 19. Umesh Wariyapperuma, 20. Zahara Abdeen, 21. Aqil Refai, 22. Shazeen Farook, 23. A.P. Jayarajah, 24. Kishanthan Sivakumar, 25. Arshaque Ishak, 26. Fazlan Faizal, 27. Ramees Mohideen, 28. Risafath Ahamed, 29. Dulitha Ellawala, 30. Ameen Sadik