HNB FINANCE celebrates International Women’s Day 2026

Sri Lanka’s leading integrated financial services provider, HNB FINANCE, celebrated International Women’s Day 2026 recognising and empowering women and their immense contribution to its workforce. The commemoration thus honoured their female workforce via customised interactive sessions that intended to further uphold them.

The event took place at the HNB Finance PLC Head Office at Nawala and welcomed the participation of the female staff across their island-wide branch network. The participants represented staff across a wide spectrum of ranks. While the staff from branches in close proximity to the head office participated in person, staff from other branches became a part of the event via a live broadcast. Similarly, this initiative promoted inclusivity and accessibility to all participants.

The esteemed guests of the session included Professor. Piyanjali De Zoysa, Senior Professor at the Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo. Also in attendance were HNB Finance Managing Director and CEO, Chaminda Prabhath, and senior management members. In addition, almost 200 HNB Finance female staff members participated and benefitted from the event.

Prof. Piyanjali De Zoysa delivered an insightful session on resilience and improving one’s mental health/mindfulness titled, ‘The Resilient Mind’. Her session engaged the participants on recognizing, accepting and overcoming psychological barriers that hinder the cultivation of a resilient mind. The session provided insight on strengthening oneself in the face of adverse conditions of life, which helped enable securing more opportunities for women.

Commenting on the significance of the occasion, HNB Finance Managing Director and CEO, Chaminda Prabhath stated that, “Women are an integral part of the society who bring in a plethora of skills to the ever evolving world. They represent their own unique set of strengths that blend innovation and intellectuality to output unwavering commitment within the workplace. As they play multiple and diverse roles both within and outside the workplace, women facilitate a promising future for the nation.”

Experienced reformer Dr. Sulakshana Jayawardena takes helm as Acting BOI Chairman

Altair elevates living experience with appointment of RMS as Facilities Management Partner

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.