BURC Lanka’s curated English communication programmes to enhance performance

British University Recruitment Consultants Lanka Ltd (BURC Lanka), the premier student recruitment consultancy and advisory for British universities in Sri Lanka, is conducting curated, individually designed, and tailored English programmes for corporates to build confident, fluent English communicators within Sri Lanka’s corporate sector, by prioritising effective communication. The programme targets corporate employees seeking to improve workplace communication, professional confidence, and English fluency in real business contexts to enhance overall corporate performance.

“Our aim, with this curated programme, is to strengthen a critical workplace skill: effective English communication, which helps to build confidence of the employee in client, stakeholder, and team interactions. Effective communication will, in turn, improve teamwork, productivity, and professional representation. Furthermore, effective communication supports talent development and leadership readiness while promoting a culture of confident communication across the organisation,” said Imogen Thomsun, Director and Co-Founder at BURC Lanka.

These programmes are specially designed for each company based on a detailed needs analysis of the organisation and its employees, ensuring relevance and measurable impact. Furthermore, ongoing assessments and structured feedback are integrated to monitor development and ensure continuous improvement. The teaching approach is a balanced blend of practical and theoretical learning delivered through interactive sessions based on real-life business scenarios.

BURC Lanka has successfully delivered this teaching programme to several corporates, including Zimantra, Global Marine Group, and Synex International (Pvt) Ltd.

The programme is delivered by BURC Lanka’s highly qualified in-house English teaching team, which comprises Ms. Nishani Tissera, who holds a BA (Hons) in English and brings strong academic expertise in language and communication, and Ms. Ruvini Weerasekara, a BA in Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages, specialising in practical, learner-centred instruction.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.