GHR appoints Sanath Jayasuriya as Brand Ambassador

Global Housing & Real Estate Chairman Dasun Wickramarathna with Brand Ambassador Sanath Jayasuriya

Global Housing & Real Estate (Pvt.) Ltd (GHR) has announced a landmark partnership with Sri Lankan cricket legend Sanath Jayasuriya, as its Brand Ambassador, as GHR enters a new chapter in its journey within Sri Lanka’s luxury real estate sector.

The partnership was officially unveiled at a press conference held at Cinnamon Life, Colombo, on September 14, 2026, bringing together industry leaders, investors and members of the media under the theme ‘Two Gamechangers, A New Beginning’.

The collaboration brings together two names associated with challenging convention in their respective fields: Jayasuriya, whose fearless approach transformed the dynamics of international cricket and GHR, which has sought to introduce new approaches to property investment and luxury living in Sri Lanka.

Over the past two decades, GHR has built its presence in Sri Lanka’s real estate sector with a focus on quality, structural integrity and long-term investment value.

A significant milestone in the company’s journey came in 2016, when GHR introduced the hotel residency concept to the Sri Lankan market. The model brought together luxury hospitality and real estate investment, creating opportunities for property ownership with the potential to generate investment returns while contributing to the growth of the country’s high-end tourism offering. GHR has since continued to expand its portfolio across key destinations in Sri Lanka.

GHR Chairman Dasun Wickramarathna said, “For over 20 years, GHR has strived to push the boundaries of what property development can achieve in Sri Lanka. As pioneers who introduced the hotel residency concept back in 2016, our mission has always been clear: to provide high-yield investment opportunities for our clients while taking Sri Lanka’s condominium industry into a new frontier.

When looking for a voice to represent GHR’s ethos, Jayasuriya was the natural choice. Just as he disrupted traditional international cricket and redefined how the world viewed the opening overs, GHR challenged the traditional approaches to real estate and established a new benchmark in luxury living.”

Jayasuriya said, “Throughout my life, I have always believed in vision, commitment and backing pioneers who are not afraid to change the game. GHR has proven time and again that they are true visionaries in Sri Lanka’s real estate market, especially with their trailblazing work in hotel residencies.

GHR is on the verge of unveiling a truly extraordinary high-rise landmark along the southern coast. This project is going to set a new standard for luxury living and investment in Sri Lanka.”

With an expanding hotel residency portfolio spanning from Negombo, Sigiriya, Nuwaraeliya, Hikkaduwa, GHR is looking to expand towards Sri Lanka’s southern coast as the next growth stage to meet the demand created by the tourism sector.