Memoirs of one of Epstein’s victims, Virginia Giuffre, titled Nobody’s Girl, released posthumously

The Epstein files on sex trafficking of young girls have still not been released

According to most polls, almost 75% of Americans of every stripe want all Epstein files released. What is even more surprising is this has been consistently demanded by a substantial number of Republican members of Congress, including some of the most vociferous members of Trump’s MAGA base, notably Georgia Congresswoman, Marjorie Taylor Greene. And when MTG becomes one of the more reasonable voices in the Republican Party, something has gone crazy with the US political system.

Many Republican lawmakers, including staunch Trump supporters like Republican Senators Josh Hawley and John Kennedy, comment that sooner or later, Congress will pass legislation demanding the Justice Department to release the files. Added Hawley, “Listen, he ran the biggest human trafficking ring, maybe in human history. Everybody knows it. I mean, there’s video footage of it. He was prosecuted, his associates were prosecuted for it. And we’re going to believe that this guy who got filthy rich off sex trafficking young women all over the globe, he got rich off that. But he didn’t know who his clients were? I find that hard to believe”.

In an email to FreePress reporter, Daniel Bates, Marijke Chartouni, an outspoken Epstein survivor, explained the reason for the waffling of Attorney General Pam Bondi and the rest of the Trump Justice Department from releasing the Epstein files:

“The speculation around the purported Epstein files only exaggerates the conspiracy theories that deflect attention from the crucial task of holding the DOJ (Department of Justice) responsible for its failure to prevent this trafficking atrocity.

(Amid all the current outcry in the media about the files, it is easy to lose sight and demand justice for the most tortured people of this vile crime – the more than 1,000 victims – young girls – preyed on by Epstein and his fellow pedophiles.

And the blame for this tragedy should not be confined to the current administration alone. The Epstein sex trafficking operation had been active since the turn of the century, and should have been more thoroughly investigated by the Departments of Justice of previous administrations, including the Democratic administrations of Presidents Obama and Biden, which also had access to these files and public complaints from survivors. One reprehensible reason for this failure to release the files may have been to shield the fact that Prince Andrew, former Democratic President, Bill Clinton, other prominent billionaires like Bill Gates and heads of state were known to be regular passengers on Epstein’s private “Lolita Express” plane on visits to Epstein’s notorious “Pedophile Island” in the US Virgin Islands).

“For decades, Epstein’s survivors have spoken the names of the people who abused them. They should face justice.

“The attempts by politicians to leverage our trauma for their own ends is just an attempt to divert attention from their ineptitude”.

From the 1990s until his arrest in 2019, Daniel Bates reports that “Epstein trafficked underage girls and young women around the world for his own ends and his powerful friends, many of whom took part in the abuse”. Bates goes on to state that “Trump’s ongoing freak-outs only stoke suspicion that he has something to hide. Lest we forget, he once said that Epstein was a ‘terrific guy’ and liked girls ‘on the younger side.’”

It has to be emphasized that there is no evidence that President Trump was involved in any of Epstein’s sex trafficking activities. Trump and Epstein were the best of friends in the 1990s, and there are numerous photographs of him partying with Epstein and his partner, convicted sex trafficker, Ghislaine Maxwell, with numerous attractive young ladies. But that proves nothing except that Trump was a playboy in the 90s, which was common knowledge and certainly not a crime.

Their friendship ended when Epstein angered Trump by “stealing” Ms Virginia Giuffre, then a 16-year-old working as a locker room attendant at a Mar a Lago spa. The story of Ms. Giuffre, who was driven to suicide last April, is just one of many tragedies that has befallen the victims of the Epstein operation. Victims at the hands of powerful, wealthy, even royal sexual predators.

Last Tuesday, Trump laughed off a question about the Epstein case: “Are you still talking about Jeffrey Epstein? This guy’s been talked about for years. We have (the shooting in) Texas, we have this (the government shutdown), we have all of these things. And are people still talking about this guy, this creep? That is unbelievable”.

What is unbelievable is that the sex trafficking crime by this “creep”, your “best friend” in the 1990s, whom you thought “was a terrific guy who liked girls on the younger side”, to whom you sent a lewd birthday card for his 50th birthday book compiled by aforementioned convicted sex trafficker, Ghislaine Maxwell, has not still been resolved.

What is inexplicable is that Epstein, the “creep” who had been arrested on child sex trafficking charges in 2019 and held without bail on suicide watch at the Manhattan Metropolitan Correctional Center, “hanged himself” under the most suspicious of circumstances. This “apparent” suicide, which happened on August 10, 2019, during the first Trump administration, has never been properly investigated by the FBI.

What is outrageous is that Epstein’s partner, Ghislaine Maxwell, who participated herself during Epstein’s lewd abuse of young girls, was convicted of sexual trafficking of minors and sentenced to 20 years in a federal prison; amazingly, she was transferred to a luxury, Club Fed type of correctional facility after a lie-filled interview with Trump’s Assistant Attorney General, Todd Blanche. Trump is now considering a pardon for this perverted criminal. And he says he hardly knew her.

And what is most horrifying is that justice has escaped on those wealthy and powerful perverts and pedophiles who had participated in the abuse of over 1,000 victims of Epstein’s atrocities.

The richest man in the world and Trump’s former ally, Elon Musk, gave the most obvious reason why the files are being kept away from the public.

“Time to drop the really big bomb. Trump is in the Epstein files. That is the real reason they haven’t been made public.”

A really big bomb was dropped last month with the posthumous release of the memoirs of Ms. Giuffre, completed before her suicide in April, 2025. A narrative that recounts the full revolting story, the story of over a thousand little girls who may at last receive long overdue justice.

Titled Nobody’s Girl: A Memoir of Surviving Abuse and Fighting for Justice, the book is the heartbreaking story of just one of over thousand little girls, some as young as 14, who suffered years of the filthiest sexual and emotional abuse at the hands of Epstein, Maxwell and a host of Epstein’s rich and powerful friends. Little girls who were “passed around like platters of fruit”.

Ms Giuffre came to the notice of the public when she began speaking out about “the abuse she was forced to endure at the hands of some of the world’s most powerful men” after 2011.

Ms. Giuffre writes that she had been forced to have sex with Prince Andrew on three separate occasions, “including once with Epstein and eight other girls”. She was 17-years-old. Her silence was purchased with a royal settlement, in February 2022, of around $12 to $16 million. A significant part of the out-of-court settlement, including $2 million from the Queen, who definitely “would not have been amused”, was donated to Giuffre’s charity supporting victims’ rights.

King Charles has now stripped his brother Andrew of his birthright title of Prince and has evicted him from the Royal Mansion. Castration, which would have been an appropriate punishment, was not considered, presumably because that had been taken off the penal code as a cruel and unusual punishment.

Ms Giuffre also writes that one of the most brutal assaults happened at the hands of a “well-known prime minister”, who choked, beat and bloodied her. The man is not named in the book, but she says it was a real turning point in her life.

Hopefully, Ms Giuffre’s book will encourage other young women to write about their own abuse by Epstein and his powerful associates.

Giuffre’s book contains some references to President Trump, as well as a number of powerful and wealthy people. However, she does not accuse Trump of any improper acts, so it makes it difficult to understand why the Trump Department of Justice is going to such great lengths to avoid releasing the entirety of the files. The obvious conclusion is that there may be incriminatory papers or photographs in other sections of the files which Trump does not want to be made public.

Here’s a man who has beaten two impeachments and 91 felonies for sexual crimes, fraud, sedition, obstruction of justice and espionage. In spite of that, he has enjoyed the confidence of the American people to be elected to the presidency on two separate occasions. In nine months of his second term, he has garnered near-dictatorial powers for himself and his Party.

Trump has even instructed his Speaker, Mike Johnson, to keep the House in recess since the government shutdown began, to prevent the swearing-in of Arizona Congresswoman-elect, Adelita Grijalva, since her electoral victory last month. When sworn-in, she would be the 218th signer of the bill which would give the majority needed by the House to force the federal release to the public of the Epstein files.

With such a record, one may wonder what malefic information these Epstein files could contain that makes Trump so determined, even terrified, to ensure that they are never released to the public. Even to his own Republican base, which has let him literally get away with murder over the last decade.

I doubt if time will ever tell the real story. And even if it does, Trump’s reputation and power will remain unscathed. For It has been conclusively proved that Trump operates in a post-shame universe, in which he alone exists above the law.

My friendship with Wijetunga used as a bridge for Gamini D to return to UNP

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.