Internal conflicts in SLFP under MR presidency and crossovers from UNP

CBK was driving force of ‘revolt’ and Mahinda turned increasingly to his family

Partly because of Anura’s fiasco and partly due to the frustration of some MR campaigners who had expected Cabinet office and had been disappointed, trouble began to brew very early in the new regime. The driving force behind the “revolt” was CBK who had been treated roughly by the new President. Many of the perks that she had cleared through Cabinet at the last minute were removed, including a large contingent of security personnel and allocation of funds for her newly formed social service organization.

She was not on the invitees list for many of the state soirees. But the most drastic of all was when her party position was summarily removed on her birthday. Old grievances were resurrected and the party was splintered with only the old faithful and those with an axe to grind against MR supporting CBK. She had managed to get Anura and Mangala to her side but was angry that other “friends” did not follow suit. She took this as a personal betrayal.

On the other hand the new President was over suspicious and kept track of any signs of contact between his ministers and their earlier leader. My view was that it was counterproductive to start clashing and that we should give MR a chance, particularly because the LTTE was growing in strength and the Government looked incapable of meeting that threat. As the new Minister of Finance MR understood the difficulties of funding development while at the same time finding resources to prosecute a war. At the beginning he was looking for a negotiated settlement but the LTTE remained intransigent. This made him to change his outlook towards the war. In this atmosphere of suspicion and uncertainty he turned to his family for assistance.

He brought in a younger brother Gotabaya who had been an army officer as his Defence Secretary. Another brother Basil was entrusted with managing party affairs and economic activity, Elder brother Chamal was made the Speaker of Parliament. First cousin Udayanga Weeratunga was appointed the Ambassador to Russia. A host of other relatives were found plum positions in the state sector leading to much criticism both within and outside the party.

The sidelining of Anura and CBK from the beginning of his tenure led to cracks in the Presidents inner circle. The most significant was the alienation of Mangala and his cronies. It has recently been disclosed by author Chandraprema, who was privy to Rajapaksa secrets, that Mangala had expected to be appointed Prime Minister in view of his bravura performance as campaign manager. Mangala’s chief lieutenant, who played a significant role in negotiations with the LTTE, Sripathi Sooriyarachchi – an ex-naval officer who expected a cabinet position – was fobbed off with a deputy ministership.

In frustration he threatened to go public with details of the MR-LTTE deal. He died in a car crash soon after leading to much speculation regarding the cause. Anura and Mangala who were closest to the JVP began to canvass their support to defeat the government during a vote on a Finance Bill. Mangala contacted me but I told him that this was not the time to destabilize a President from our own party on personal grounds.

On the appointed date there occurred a bizarre episode which was unique in our Parliamentary annals. It was an afternoon session and Anura turned up without being briefed about a JVP decision taken that morning not to support the Anura-Mangala initiative. He walked into the Opposition benches hoping to announce his defection, win the vote which would follow and be appointed Prime Minister. Technically he had crossed over and, watching the events unfold from the opposite benches, I saw the consternation on the faces of JVP leaders who had realized what was happening. Weerawansa rushed up to him and literally forced Anura to get back to the lobby after informing him of their “volte face”. It was a comic example of the lack of communication among the rebels.

Anura and Mangala were sacked from their positions that evening. If my memory serves me right Anura never came back to Parliament after that – an ignominious end to a career which was tailor made to take him to the top. MR survived the threat but it led to a fear psychosis about his colleagues which was seen in his growing dependence on his relatives and cronies. The temptation of the JVP and JHU to flirt with Anura and Mangala which nearly led to a defeat in Parliament made him open to the offers of UNPers to join him from time to time in exchange for Cabinet positions.

Mahinda Samarasinghe and Keheliya Rambukwella crossed over from the UNP and later a large contingent of UNPers led by Karu Jayasuriya joined the government. The CBK/Anura/Mangala revolt was crushed and MR emerged with a bigger majority in the House but his sense of insecurity bred by years of subservience to Anura and the latter’s attempt to dislodge him, led to a dependence on a select coterie of relatives which in the end failed him and drove him out of power in 2015. Suspicion and “drawing up of his wagons in a circle” became a characteristic of MR which blighted a Presidency that had achieved unparalleled popularity with the electorate after the comprehensive defeat of the LTTE in 2009.

The war with the LTTE still remained the main problem. Prabakaran was intransigent and the early attempts by the new President to enter into a dialogue by allocating funds for Northern rehabilitation was having no effect. But bringing his brother Gotabaya as Defence Secretary was beginning to yield results. The first advantage was that the usual suspicion of many Presidents of the incumbent Army chief’s activities became unnecessary because his brother as the Defence Secretary covered that flank. He was the President’s “eyes and ears” and no tittle tattle about the army would bother MR as it did his predecessors.

This clear line of command and trust was strengthened when GR broke seniority and appointed Sarath Fonseka as the Army Commander. SF was well known in the army as an ambitious but gutsy fighter who could take on the LTTE. He was supported by the appointment of Karannagoda as Navy chief and Gunatilleke as Air force commander. This was a new combination at the top with whom GR could interact easily. Many decisions which earlier needed the President’s intervention could now be easily left to his senior military team.

SF also reshuffled his unit commanders so that a courageous fighting force could be moulded. A perennial problem with the armed services was that their field strength was limited. The President as Finance Minister allocated sufficient funds to more than double the strength of the armed forces. Educational qualifications were pared down and rural youth from districts like Anuradhapura and Kurunegala which had `border villages’ were given preference because they were closer to the theatre of war.

So much so that unemployment figures in those areas registered a significant decrease. At the same time a publicity campaign to go with the recruitment drive was tailored to enhance the self worth of the soldiers. This campaign was entitled “Api Wenuwen Api” by Triad advertising company. It became one of the most effective communications efforts in the history of advertising in Sri Lanka. After the war was concluded in 2009 I was asked to speak at the launch of a book by C. A. Chandraprema entitled “Gota’s War”. I said the following at that meeting as reported by Sandun Jayasekara of the Daily Mirror.

“Addressing a well attended launch ceremony of the book “Gota’s War”, Dr Amunugama said that GR had an unbounded confidence in and affection for his brother President Rajapaksa which helped him to fashion and effectively put in place a fighting machine. The setting of priorities, a steady supply of weapons, building up of morale and financing were the results of this confidence within the high command that contributed to winning the war. Gota was a soldier’s soldier. He knew the army from his first day as an officer cadet to the highest echelon. He built up a team of battle hardened commanders; the armchair generals were eased out. Frontline commanders were given their due place which convinced them that the war was winnable. He had clear objectives as seen in the development drive that he launched later in Colombo city and Kotte”.

Since the new President took over the Ministry of Finance, a position he never gave up during his long tenure of office, I went back in the Cabinet to my old Ministry in which I had served as a public servant. President Rajapaksa addressing a meeting of officials in Matale had stated that he was happy to appoint a former senior public servant as his Minister of Public Administration. He was supportive of my initiatives to streamline the state services in order to provide a better deal to the public.

Another of my advantages was that I had the unstinted support of the new Secretary to the President Lalith Weeratunga. Lalith had briefly served as Additional Secretary when I was the Minister of Education. Indeed he had been selected as an entrant to the SLAS when I presided over an interview board as the Director of Combined Services under Felix Bandaranaike. He was a smart officer who had southern roots and had been selected by MR to be the Secretary to the PM when he assumed that office.

It is not well known that it was Lalith who extricated MR from the mess created by the fund entitled “Helping Hambantota” which according to CJ Sarath Silva could have landed MR in prison for four years. So naturally he was beholden to Lalith who followed him like Mary’s little lamb to whatever high position that his patron was elevated to. I knew that Lalith was in my corner when MR discussed the abilities of his Cabinet Ministers.

My predecessor Amarasiri Dodangoda had been very ill and unable to attend to his duties on a full time basis. He spent a lot of his time as a Minister either in hospital or at home. So my first step was to clean up the building and offices which had been neglected since the time of Ratnasiri Wickremanayake and Karu Jayasuriya. To tackle a practice which was central to my Ministry functions and which badly needed reform, I studied the procedures relating to salaries and pensions in the government service.

The prevailing system was antiquated and I and Gamini Wickremanayake who was an Additional Secretary under Felix Bandaranaike, had earlier thought of reforming it. The current practice was that each office had to make a paysheet, get cash from the nearest bank or post office and prepare envelopes in to which salaries in currency notes were manually inserted. The recipient would then sign on a stamp in front of a paying officer and collect his envelope. This called for a large staff dealing with payments and receipts in every office.

I introduced a radical change. Every public servant was provided with a bank account in his name. We would issue one cheque to the manager of the relevant bank with a list of payees and the amount due to them. The bank would then deposit that amount of money in the individuals bank account from which he could withdraw it at will. I asked the banks to install ATM machines so that money could be withdrawn by the “salarymen” [As the Japanese describe their officials] without crowding the bank’s outlets. The same procedure was recommended for pensioners who had earlier to get a monthly certificate from the AGA’s office and take it to a post office for payment. This reform reduced the number of clerks dealing with payments by a considerable number. They could now be deployed for more productive work. It was also a convenience to the salaryman and the pensioner.

As expected this suggestion drew a storm of protest from the Trade Unions and hide bound officials who were afraid of change. But I also had forward looking senior officers like The Director of Pensions Tillekeratne who boldly adopted the new method so that the value of such a change could be appreciated by our clients. I negotiated with the unions and found that their fear was that without “loose change” their members would not pay their TU dues. But since that could be done at source their fears were allayed.

I also got the Banks to advertise freebies like special draws and all expense paid trips to Buddhagaya and Saranath to new depositors from the public service. Banks were delighted to get these new deposits – a job they should have been doing anyway – and happily undertook the extra work that came their way. Even now when I meet retired public servants they thank me for my innovation which had helped them to save money.

From the time I was the Director of Combined Services, research and training for public servants was high on my agenda. Several reports regarding improving the performance of the public service had emphasized the need for training. Among them the most emphatic were the recommendations of Shelton Wanasinghe, a senior CCS officer. He suggested the establishment of a SLAS training institute. This was done and Wanasinghe became its first director. He was full of enthusiasm and received the support of the Ministry of Public Administration.

It was linked to the Indian Training Institute in Hyderabad and our syllabus was based on the Hyderabad model. When I was Director of Combined Services and later Senior Assistant Secretary of the Public Administration Ministry, as the official responsible for overseeing SLIDA [Sri Lanka Institute of Development Administration], I gave my full support to this venture. All recruits to the SLAS were given a year’s training at SLIDA after which they were absorbed to the permanent cadre of the SLAS.

Several mid level officials of the SLAS preferred to transfer to this Institute as lecturers since they could follow their academic interests as well as obtaining paid leave for training abroad. SLIDA is well established today and is an integral part of a SLAS officers’ career path.

As the new Minister I had the opportunity to expand the activities of SLIDA and link it with top class universities. The Commonwealth Office in London which had a division on the promotion of education which was headed by my CCS colleague Raja Gomes, invited me to a high level meeting on promoting administrative skills to be held in Sydney. Raja had earlier served in our Training Centre and was especially interested in administrative reform. This invitation gave me a good opportunity to visit Australia and interact with senior specialists in research and training. At the same time my friend Kusumsiri Balapatabendi, who was our High Commissioner there, had arranged a productive itinerary for me in Sydney and Melbourne which were cities with large concentrations of Sri Lankan expatriates especially among the professionals.

The visit to Melbourne was a memorable one. The state of Victoria of which Melbourne was the capital had many universities and training institutes which were manned by ex-Sri Lankans who went out of their way to support our proposals. Prominent among them were Monash University and the University of Victoria. After a fruitful visit to Monash, which had one of my students in its faculty of Social Sciences, I was able to launch an initiative for an exchange of researchers between that University and SLIDA.

The lady registrar of Victoria University was also a Burgher expatriate and was keen to strengthen links with Sri Lanka. With the enforcement of the “Sinhala Only” policy many highly educated Burghers had left the country and occupied good positions abroad. Among them was Professor De Kretser a scientist who had been appointed to the prestigious position of Governor of Victoria state. He invited me for lunch in the Governor’s mansion which was located in a sprawling estate in the heart of the city. It had been occupied earlier by English Governors who had been appointed by the Queen of England.

Dr. De Kretser was a nominee of the Australian government but he received his letter of appointment from the Queen as she was the head of the Australian state. As an immigrant he had been selected to be the symbolic head of Victoria which was a state full of migrants from all parts of the world. Governor De Kretser told me that he was born in Dehiwela and had been a student at Royal College upto the sixth standard. He had migrated with his parents and excelled in his studies in Australia.

As one of the leading scientific researchers in his new home country he had been honoured by being nominated to one of the highest positions there. The large contingent of ex-Sri Lankans in Melbourne were proud of him and had arranged a procession with Kandyan dancers and drummers to escort him to his office on the first day. He was proud of that gesture and showed me photographs of that event. I .in turn invited him to pay a visit to his native country. He obliged some months later and received a warm welcome, including a reception by his former neighbours from Dehiwela.

Largest nation-wide protests in history against Trump on Saturday, March 28

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.