Caught, released and caught again

Arumahandi Janith Madushanka de Silva alias Podi Lassi, a dangerous underworld character, who was arrested in India, was brought back to Sri Lanka yesterday. On watching his arrival at the BIA, Citizen Perera must have uttered the same words as Mr. Bumble in Oliver Twist: “The law is an ass”. Criminals are caught, released and caught again. Arresting an underworld figure is no walk in the park. It takes months of meticulous planning to nab powerful criminals protected by private armies. The crime busters who risk life and limb to track down criminals are demoralised when the suspects they arrest get bail and flee the country.

Podi Lasi was arrested in 2020 and detained in the Boossa high-security prison, together with some other dangerous criminals. He secured bail in 2024. It was obvious that he would flee the country. He played the victim card, claiming that the STF was planning to kill him. His lawyers even demanded that he be given protection. He disappeared soon afterwards, and no one was surprised.

Many an eyebrow was raised when Podi Lassi was enlarged on bail, for he had even issued death threats to the then President and the Defence Secretary. In 2020, while in detention, Podi Lasi and two other underworld characters known as Kosgoda Tharaka and Pitigala Keuma threatened to harm the then President Gotabaya Rajapaksa, Defence Secretary General Kamal Gunaratne, and some senior prison officers. Podi Lassi bragged that his hit squads were capable of taking any target. Those who are charged with less serious offences than drug smuggling and underworld activities are denied bail in this country to prevent them from intimidating witnesses and fleeing overseas.

One may recall that a notorious drug dealer named Mohommad Najim Mohommad Imran alias Kanjipani Imran obtained bail in 2022. Everybody knew that he would flee the country, and he did so a couple of weeks later. The then Public Security Minister Tiran Alles claimed that some unscrupulous lawyers had facilitated Imran’s escape and that of another criminal called Ganemulle Sanjeewa. Imran had been arrested in Dubai together with Sri Lanka’s Napoleon of Crime, Samarasinghe Arachchige Madush Lakshitha alias Makandure Madush in 2019, and brought back to Colombo. Madush perished allegedly in a crossfire between the police and an underworld gang while in custody. Imran has been running his crime syndicate here from overseas. He is believed to have masterminded the murder of Wasantha Perera or Club Wasantha in 2024. Ganemulle Sanjeewa was gunned down inside a courtroom in Colombo in 2025.

Some underworld kingpins have turned this country into a narcotic hub, for all intents and purposes, if the sheer amounts of dangerous drugs frequently taken into custody are any indication. They are capable of killing anyone anywhere. A lawyer and his wife were gunned down near the defence headquarters complex, Akuregoda, recently.

It is public knowledge that whenever a drug czar is netted, a well-coordinated operation gets underway to secure his release, with lawyers, politicians, and some rogue elements in the police and other state institutions such as the Government Analyst’s Department springing into action. In September 2023, Nadun Chinthaka Wickremaratne alias Harak Kata almost escaped from the CID headquarters where he was detained and interrogated. If not for some vigilant STF personnel, his crime syndicate would have been able to launch a spectacular operation with the help of some commandos and spring him free. Salindu Malshitha alias Kudu Salindu, arrested with Harak Kata in Madagascar, and extradited to Sri Lanka in 2023 also fled the country after obtaining bail.

Sri Lanka’s anti-narcotic laws are characterised by glaring inadequacies that allow clever lawyers appearing for wealthy drug lords to drive a coach and horses through them. They have done so on numerous occasions much to the dismay of the police and the public. The need for laws with stronger teeth to deal with drug lords and other such criminals firmly and make this country safe for the ordinary citizens cannot be overemphasised.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.