The Unit Trust industry sees strong investor activity in October 2025

The unit trust industry of Sri Lanka reported a 16.0% year-over-year growth of its assets under management (AUM) to Rs. 603 Bn by the end of October 2025. This is also up from Rs. 592 Bn in September. These assets are currently managed across 85 funds by 16 management companies.

The industry saw 3,628 new unit holders invest in the market during the month, bringing the total number of investors to 137,224 as of end of October. Year-to-date, the industry has added nearly 25,000 new investors. October also saw an influx of approximately Rs. 4 Bn into equity-related funds. This reflects investors’ continued confidence in the growth potential of Sri Lanka’s capital markets and a growing appetite for long-term wealth creation through diversified investment portfolios, indicating a gradual shift away from traditional savings-focused methods.

Speaking of the industry performance, Unit Trust Association of Sri Lanka (UTASL) President and CEO of JB Financial, Christine Dias Bandaranaike, CFA, noted that “the industry has performed remarkably in 2025 with AUM surpassing the Rs. 600 Bn mark earlier this year. We continue to see strong potential for market growth, driven by increasing investor awareness and a broader range of fund offerings.”

She further added: “Our recently concluded ‘Investor Awareness Initiative’ held from the 27th to 31st of October, which aimed to educate the public to build wealth through unit trusts, was a great success. Sixteen management companies participated in the event, each bringing their unique expertise and commitment to wealth building. As a part of the UTASL’s ongoing efforts to promote unit trusts, the initiative reinforced the importance of informed investing, bringing in both new and existing investors to make confident, long-term investment decisions.”

Together with the Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC) and the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE), the UTASL remains focused on strengthening financial literacy and investor participation across the country – particularly in unit trusts. While pooled funds are one of the most widely used and trusted investment tools globally, awareness and participation among Sri Lankan investors remain relatively low.

The UTASL is the representative body for the country’s licensed fund management companies, dedicated to upholding the highest standards of professionalism, integrity and transparency across the industry. Consisting of 16 member companies regulated by the SEC, the UTASL aims to popularise unit trusts and encourage Sri Lankans to prioritise long-term and professionally guided investing, in addition to short-term savings, whilst contributing to national economic growth.

For more information on unit trusts and to connect with management companies, visit www.utasl.lk.

Elephant House Ice Cream crowned Brand of the Year at SLIM Brand Excellence Awards 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.