‘Vehicle-Testing Can Save Lives’

Automobile Association of Ceylon (AAC), in collaboration with the Federation Internationale de L’ Automobile (FIA) and under the UN Decade of Action for Road Safety has been consistently engaging in road safety enhancement programs for all citizens of Sri Lanka.

Current data indicates that while over 08 million vehicles are registered in the country, only heavy vehicles (less than 20% of the vehicle population) are subjected to compulsory road-worthiness tests.

Fatal accidents due to technical failures in vehicles are on the rise and the damage to lives and property is severe.

We also understand that there is a death every three hours and eight deaths per day in road accidents. This amounts to nearly 3000 deaths in road accidents per year.

AA of Ceylon has launched the “Vehicle Testing can Save Lives” project with the advice and support given to execute our campaign by the Minister of Transport, chairman, National Council for Road Safety (NCRC), Deputy Inspector General of Police (Traffic Division), Dr. Indika Jagoda, Deputy Director (Accident Service), National Hospital, president, Lions Club of Boralasgamuwa, Metro(Lions Club International – District 306 D 2) and other stake-holders to find a workable, low / cost solution for mandatory vehicle testing in Sri Lanka.

Therefore, this project aims to educate the public on the necessity of checking essential safety features in all vehicles and the benefits of same to all road users.

AAC has therefore respectfully requested Anura Kumara Dissanayake, President of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, to consider implementing the proposal we have submitted to him, to minimize fatal accidents, injuries to people and damage to vehicles and property due to road accidents and to also implement a rule to have compulsorily road-worthiness checking of all vehicles. (AAC)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.