When lessons of history go unlearnt

Former President Mahinda Rajapaksa has returned his official bulletproof vehicle in compliance with a government directive, according to the Opposition. There has been no response from the government to the Opposition’s claim. When it came under fire for reducing security provided to the former Presidents, on a previous occasion, the NPP claimed that the levels of security for all political leaders were determined on the basis of threat assessments. Successive governments have used this excuse for reducing security provided to their political opponents.

Those who failed to prevent the Easter Sunday terrorist bombings in 2019 despite the availability of actionable intelligence and repeated warnings are still in the key positions of the defence establishment––thanks to their political connections. So, how can the defence authorities be expected to assess security threats properly?

The NPP leaders made a solemn pledge to the public that they would downsize the VIP security divisions immediately after forming a government. They said the government leaders must not be given anything that was not available to the ordinary people, and they would travel in buses and trains. But none of the NPP MPs use public transport. Security for the President and the Prime Minister has been increased—and rightly so. They must be provided with maximum possible security. The former Presidents, who provided political leadership for the country’s war on terror, must be protected likewise. If not for the defeat of the LTTE, the NPP leaders would not have been able to visit the North and the East, much less conduct election campaigns in those parts of the country. If the former Presidents have committed any wrongful acts, they should be dealt with according to the law, but their security must not be reduced for political reasons.

All previous governments sought to curtail their political opponents’ movements by reducing their security. This is the name of the game in Sri Lankan politics. The boot is now on the other foot, and those who stooped so low as to curtail their political rivals’ security are now letting out howls of protests. Two wrongs however do not make a right.

The NPP seems to think that the SLPP leaders are trying to make a comeback the way they did during the Yahapalana government, and therefore their efforts must be frustrated at any cost. The SLPP insists that the curtailment of former President Mahinda Rajapaksa’s security is part of the government’s strategy to intimidate and restrain the Opposition. In the 06 May local government polls, the SLPP fared slightly better than it had done in last year’s presidential and parliamentary elections. But it has a long way to go before being in a position to pose a formidable political challenge to the incumbent government unless the latter ruins things for itself big time. If the NPP exercises control over its politicians, practises what it preached during its election campaigns and fulfils its key promises, the Opposition will have its work cut out to turn the tables on it. Hence the need for it to remain intensely focused on the economic front, where anything can go wrong unexpectedly. Most of all, in a couple of years, foreign debt repayment will commence in earnest, and the country must be prepared for possible economic shocks. Unless the NPP gets its act together, and lives up to the people’s expectations, its leaders might have to outrun protesters as the SLPP leaders did in 2022.

The practice of governments meddling with security provided to their political opponents is counterproductive. President Ranasinghe Premadasa’s predicament is a case in point. The Premadasa government pooh-poohed threats to former National Security Minister and UNP dissident Lalith Athulathmudali. His assassination in April 1993 was blamed on that repressive regime; it sparked protests that led to the 1994 regime change.

It takes just one wrong step for mighty governments to collapse. We have seen that happen. Those who do not learn from history are said to be doomed to repeat it.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.