Politics of protected species

“To see what is in front of one’s nose needs a constant struggle.”Orwell (In Front of Your Nose)

Before Sarath Fonseka was arrested, he had to be rebranded as a traitor.

Until he had his fallout with the Rajapaksas, Gen Fonseka was a pre-eminent member of that most protected of protected species – the War Hero. In mid-2009, Gotabaya Rajapaksa took a verbal pickaxe to several journalists for being critical of Gen Fonseka. “You are attacking (Lieutenant General) Sarath Fonseka who has committed his life for the past 18 years to waging a war… This is no laughing matter. Tell me one thing you have done for this country compared to Lt Gen. Fonseka. He is loved by the soldiers. They can cause harm…. There is no necessity to have defence columns to discuss military matters. Laws will be introduced to restrict reporting on the conduct of the military or on Commanders of the Armed Forces. The military will campaign for such laws. We can see whether the voice of the military is stronger than the campaign of the journalists…. I am definitely not threatening your lives. I am not. It will happen from where it happens. Our services are appreciated by 99 per cent of the people. They love the Army Commander (Lt. Gen. Fonseka) and the Army. Those who love us do what is required. We cannot help that” (The Sunday Times -1.6.2009).

Six months later, when Gen Fonseka had to be tarred with the traitor’s brush prior to being hunted down, the Rajapaksas wielded the same weapon: ‘those who love us’. As the presidential election campaign vended its way pitting ruling party candidate Mahinda Rajapaksa against joint opposition candidate Sarath Fonseka, the Rajapaksa machine busied itself with riling up ‘those who love us’ to hate their former hero.

In George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four, people of the dystopian state Oceania had to take part in a ritual called Two Minute Hate. An image of the chief enemy/traitor is flashed on telescreens and people scream their hate at him. In an unconsciously Orwellian campaign (doubtless a brainchild of Basil Rajapaksa), government members and state media accused Gen Fonseka of innumerable crimes, comparing him to Adolf Hitler and Idi Amin. Then came a series of demonstrations in provincial towns organised by the ruling party to proclaim ‘public hate’ towards the war-winning army commander and to demand his immediate arrest as a traitor. When the news of Gen. Fonseka’s arrest broke, some ruling party members lit crackers.

In the Rajapaksa universe, supporting the Family is a necessary precondition for becoming and remaining a war hero. Sarath Fonseka was a war hero so long as he remained loyal to the Rajapaksas. The moment he turned against the Rajapaksas, he lost his war hero status. Similarly, retired General Suresh Salley is a war hero today because he remains a loyal member of the Rajapaksa Inc. If he turns against the family tomorrow, he will cease being a member of that protected species. Loyalty towards the Rajapaksas – and not services rendered to the country – is the litmus test.

There is little doubt that the motley collection of (once and current) Rajapaksa acolytes who engaged in a Satyagraha demanding the release of Gen Salley did so because they fear that detention might dent his loyalty. The simultaneity between the spurt of activity on Gen Salley’s behalf and the imposition of a travel ban on Gotabaya Rajapaksa is no coincidence. The Family will do anything to keep Brother/Uncle Gotabaya out of detention.

In April 2020, lawyer and human rights activist Hejaz Hisbullah was arrested under the PTA and accused of being involved in the Easter Sunday Massacre.

Since there wasn’t a shred of proof to buttress this preposterous accusation, the CID (under Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s handpicked director) resorted to fabrication. Mr Hisbullah was involved with Save the Pearls, a charity helping children from underprivileged families. The CID alleged that he was using the charity as a cover to radicalise the children. As proof, the CID obtained statements from some of the children. Four of those children subsequently filed fundamental rights applications stating that they were detained for three days without parents and coerced into implicating Mr Hisbullah.

The next step was to prove that these child accusers actually knew Mr Hisbullah. The plan was to show the children a picture of Mr Hisbullah in advance to ensure that they pick the right man at the identity parade. The plan backfired thanks to the then Fort magistrate Ranga Dissanayake. He stopped the CID’s machination and exposed it in open court. “I want to reveal this. CID officers tried to show pictures. I had to order them to leave the chamber” (https://www.ft.lk/news/CID-attempted-to-show-photograph-of-Hejaaz-to-children-before-ID-parade-Fort-Magistrate/56-702226).

Eventually, the case against Mr Hisbullah hung on the statement of a single child. The relevant portion in the B report demonstrates the ludicrous nature of the CID’s case, “Hizbullah said he was a lawyer and that he has a university in Batticaloa. He said that if we study well, we can enter his university in Batticaloa and become a lawyer like him. He showed a video of Israel and Palestine and said that the Christians have taken the mosques in Palestine and we have to attack the Catholics if we want to hurt them” (https://www.colombotelegraph.com/index.php/hejaaz-hizbullah-case-reduced-to-a-single-childs-statement/).

Obviously Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s CID did not know that lawyer Hejaaz Hisbullah and politician MLAM Hizbullah who started the Batticaloa campus were two different men. Equally obviously, Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s CID had no notion that mosques in Palestine are being taken over not by Christians but by Jewish extremists (they are also attacking churches because some Palestinians are Christians). But surely the AG’s Department is not so ignorant on matters national and international? Or was this yet another case of the AG’s Department having to prosecute someone without a shred of proof due to Rajapaksa pressure?

Even though the case against Mr Hisbullah was reduced to rubble, the Rajapaksa regime continued to detain him under the PTA until the Supreme Court ordered his release in February 2022. By that time, he had been in detention for close to two years in a six by three foot cell. He was initially denied access to a lawyer. When given access, he had to talk to his lawyer in Sinhala in front of a CID officer. His wife was pregnant with their daughter when he was arrested. He would see his baby daughter only after his release.

Hejaaz Hisbullah’s ordeal, horrendous as it was, pales compared to what 26-year-old poet Ahnaf Jazeem had to undergo after he was arrested under the PTA in May 2020. Mr Jazeem had published a poetry collection called  Navarasam. The authorities claimed that the poems promoted extremism.

“I was initially tied to a chair for two weeks,” he would recall. “I was forced to kneel, hands tied back and with my legs crumpled… They threatened me with more brutal and painful torturing methods like hogtying… I struggled to sleep with handcuffs for about three months… Sometimes they put the cuffs on my legs at night… I suffered from mosquito bites and bed bugs, cockroaches, and huge rats running over my body. A rat once bit me… I was detained on the sixth floor but the toilets were on the second floor and officers would not allow detainees to pass urine until the morning… We had rashes, wounds, and bleeding that were not treated… They tried to prevent me meeting with a lawyer… When a remanded person is brought back to prison after being produced before the court, they were searched by Special Task Force soldiers. If it was a Muslim, they told him to strip naked and they checked their anus by inserting a needle with a light… There were several people including Tamils who were detained as supporters of Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, and suffered torture… I saw them torturing one person by hanging him and puncturing his genitals with a pen…” (https://www.wsws.org/en/articles/2022/02/21/slja-f21.html). He would spend 19 months in this hell before being granted bail in December 2021.

If Gen Salley is being treated even one-millionth as badly, it should be condemned unreservedly, because no citizen (be it ‘war hero’, traitor, or neither) deserves such inhumane fare. Gen Salley’s detention must be opposed not because he is a ‘war hero’ but because he is detained under the PTA. In its nearly half-a-century of existence, the PTA had singularly failed to prevent terrorism. A ragtag of a Tamil insurgency grew into a full-scale war under its brutal watch. It also failed to prevent the Easter Sunday Massacre. Though statistics are not available, it is reasonable to assume that most of those who were/are detained under the PTA are innocent of the crimes they are accused of.

The NPP came into power promising to abolish the PTA. Instead of honouring its promise (possibly by adopting an internationally accepted definition of terrorism and making terrorism a non-bailable offense under the normal law), the government is planning to replace the PTA with an equally draconian the Protection of State from Terrorism Act (PSTA).

Gen Salley’s family says that he is on a fast demanding the abolition of the PTA. Whether he experienced a Road to Damascus moment (a sudden, life-changing realization, conversion, or radical shift in one’s beliefs or attitude. The phrase originates from a well-known biblical story) or whether this is just another ruse remains to be seen. Had the NPP a sincere wish to abolish the PTA while wrong-footing the Rajapaksas, it could have seized the Salley moment. Unfortunately, the NPP’s commitment to democracy is no different from that of any other Lankan party, shallow and opportunistic. The only remaining question is, does it have enough intelligence to figure out that abolishing the PTA is not just in the interests of Lankan democracy, but also in the interests of its own members, President Dissanayake downwards. As George Orwell said in his Proposed preface to Animal Farm, “These people don’t see that if you encourage totalitarian methods, the time may come when they will be used against you instead of for you.”

This government and this opposition seem to occupy antipodal spaces on every issue. The acrimony between the two sides is such that they failed to come together even when Cyclone Ditwah devastated almost the entirety of the country.

But there’s one issue on which the government and the opposition are in total lockstep – sweeping the child rape case against Pallegama Hemaratana thera under the rug of time, procrastination or inefficiency. Staying mum about a scandal that had taken the country by storm is the iron determination that binds Anura Kumara Dissanayake, the Rajapaksas, Ranil Wickremesinghe, Sajith Premadasa and other lesser lights of the Opposition (and most of the mainstream media) into one tight whole.

In May 2023, the then head of the National Child Protection Authority admitted that there’s an “increased incidence of assaults, physical and verbal and sexual abuse and harassment against novice monks (samaneras) within temples.” His solution: let the “relevant clergy take measures within the institution of temples and their respective orders to prevent such” (The Morning – 5.2.2023). In other words, get the foxes to protect the chicken coops.

The NCPA is acting differently now, definitely on the Pallegama Hemaratana case.

The government – and especially its more firebrand members – should be cheering the NCPA on. Unfortunately, they are doing the opposite. According to the BBC Sinhala service, during a meeting between the Women Parliamentarians Caucus, the police, the AG’s Department, and the NCPA, parliamentarian Lakmali Hemachandra had criticised NCPA legal director Sajeevani Abeykoon for saying that the police had to be goaded to take action against the monk.

Despite Ms. Hemachandara’s ire, that was the literal truth. Child X gave her statement to the Nittambuwa police, naming the monk as her first rapist, on April 10, 2026. The police, in violating of its duty, didn’t inform the NCPA. On April 22, independent journalist Bimal Ruhunuge lodged a complaint with the NCPA. On May 4, the police named Child X’s mother as a suspect without mentioning the monk. After multiple fruitless communications with the police, the NCPA filed a motion on May 8 asking the court to name the monk as a suspect. The court ordered the arrest of the monk only after that. Without that NCPA intervention, this alleged suspect of child rape might still be lording it over the eight holiest sites of Lankan Buddhism, including the Sri Maha Bodhi.

Having directed her anger at the NCPA rather than the alleged rapist of an 11-year-old child, Parliamentarian Hemachandra now wants the Speaker to refer the BBC article to Ethics and Privileges Committee. DIG Medawatte wants Ranil Wickremesinghe’s Online Safety Act (which the NPP strenuously opposed) to be used to prevent further disclosures by You Tubers and websites. Just the way to go when the GSP+ is about to be renewed – or not!

So long as some institutions/people are treated as protected species, democracy will remain flawed, justice incomplete, and the most unprivileged citizens vulnerable to abuses and violations. These were some of the main problems the NPP promised to fix. Instead, it is adding another layer to an already heavily loaded pile of unfairness and discrimination.

The Good Governance government failed because, after a praiseworthy first year, it turned its back on its own ideals. The NPP government is failing for the same reason. The outcome of that failure is a foregone conclusion.

Soldiering on after the Central Bank bomb and intricacies to tender boards

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.