Brandix highlights ESG Stewardship in latest ESG Report

Brandix launched its 10th Sustainability Report for 2024/25 this week, and laid out new ambitious targets that will transcend its environmental and social footprint. Brandix is the pioneer of sustainable manufacturing in the apparel sector for the Asia-Pacific region, including the first Net Zero Carbon Apparel Manufacturing facility in the world.

The latest Brandix Sustainability Report showcases the company’s robust industry-leading Environment, Social and Governance (ESG) frameworks across all operations in Sri Lanka, India and Bangladesh. The company enriches the lives of over 500,000 associates globally.

At the core of its Environmental thrust is circularity. Brandix aims to become Net Zero Carbon across all locations by 2030, which is an ambitious target from its current figure of 37%. At present 90% of all solid waste is recycled or reused, and recently launched a pilot project to recycle elastic waste at commercial scale. Brandix also plans to eliminate dependence on ground water across all operations, a commitment that extends to the whole water mix.

“Our journey commenced as far back as 2006 at our Seeduwa plant, when no one else in this industry was interested or invested in sustainability. We maintained that momentum, weaving environmental stewardship to our social, supply chain and stakeholder engagements. The value we create is global, touching the lives of millions of people including future generations. Our latest Sustainability Report reaffirms our continued commitment to these principles and transparency. It will strengthen our journey towards the next wave of advancements,” said Brandix Group Managing Director Hasitha Premaratne.

The latest Brandix Sustainability Report is themed ‘Every Thread Matters’, and discusses how each element in a value chain matter to weave strong, resilient and effective outcomes that add value to users. Brandix believes change begins with agile and innovative choices, and the company has amply demonstrated responsibility and performance can go hand-in-hand.

In addition to groundbreaking initiatives on the environmental front, Brandix also leads several initiatives on social empowerment. Children of all Brandix associates receive stationary, uniforms and all other school essentials for the full curricular year, in addition to scholarships and vocational development schemes. The company also provides clean drinking water and sanitation facilities to all associates and the communities in which it operates.

At present, 65% of Brandix facilities in Sri Lanka are powered by solar energy, and it is ramping up investment to achieve 100% within the target period. This will also take place in India, whilst regulatory challenges in Bangladesh slowed progress.