US Congress delegation visits Parliament to strengthen independent budget analysis capacity

From June 8–12, the US Embassy in Sri Lanka, in collaboration with the House Democracy Partnership (HDP) and the US Congressional Budget Office (CBO), is supporting the Parliament of Sri Lanka in strengthening its capacity to independently analyse Government spending, economic policies, and proposed legislation.

As part of a week-long technical assistance exchange in Colombo, a delegation comprising HDP Program Manager Meagan Moore and CBO experts Megan Carroll and Christi Hawley Anthony is engaging with approximately 100 Members of Parliament and parliamentary staff to share US best practices in providing independent, nonpartisan analysis for budget oversight and public spending. The engagement includes working sessions with Members of Parliament and staff of the Committee on Public Finance (COPF) focused on the design and structure of a Parliamentary Budget Office (PBO), identifying legislators’ information needs, and developing a roadmap for long-term institutional capacity.

In the United States, Congress relies on the CBO, an independent and nonpartisan institution, to provide objective analysis of budgetary and economic issues. Similar institutions support legislatures around the world by helping lawmakers assess the costs, economic impacts, and long-term fiscal implications of proposed policies and legislation. As part of efforts to strengthen parliamentary oversight and evidence-based policymaking, the Parliament of Sri Lanka is exploring the establishment of a PBO to provide Members of Parliament and parliamentary committees with comparable analytical support.

During the visit, CBO experts are sharing practical tools and lessons learned from the U.S. Congress to help strengthen Sri Lanka’s parliamentary oversight of budgets and public spending. The exchange highlights American expertise in fiscal analysis and supports US efforts to promote stable, transparent, and prosperous partners across the Indo-Pacific—creating stronger conditions for trade, investment, and economic growth. To complement this program, in September, the US Embassy in Sri Lanka will sponsor an exchange program for a select group of Members of Parliament to learn first-hand about these critical elements of governance in the United States.