Serving as MR’s Deputy Finance Minister and the travel the job entailed

The two week delay in declaring the results of the Kandy district elections upset all the plans of MR to reconstitute his Cabinet. I was aware that he had reserved the slot of Education Minister for me particularly at the urging of his secretary Lalith Weeratunga, Sunimal Fernando and PB Jayasundera. MR phoned me to ask when the rescheduled mini election in Kandy would be held. But due to delays he had to go ahead and appoint his Cabinet with Bandula Gunawardena as the Minister of Education.

Sunimal Fernando told me that he had remonstrated with MR to no avail. By the time I came to Colombo the new Cabinet had already been installed and I was asked to function from the Ministry of Finance as MR’s deputy. He was too embarrassed to tell me of this suggestion himself and had deputed PB Jayasundera to convince me. PB told me that he was facing a difficulty as he had no one to handle international monetary affairs as the President could not undertake that task which involved a lot of foreign travel. I agreed and went back to the Treasury but not for too long.

Very soon the President effected another reshuffle of his Cabinet with the objective of introducing a new concept of “Senior Ministers” at the urging of PB Jayasundera. Several ministers who were senior in age and tenure in Parliament were appointed senior ministers in respect of a clutch of subjects which they were expected to oversee. Leading this group was Ratnasiri Wickremanayake, the former Prime Minister and included the leaders of the left parties – DEW Gunasekera, Tissa Vitarane and Athauda Seneviratne. I was appointed the Senior Minister (of International Monetary Cooperation).

Many of the seniors led by Ratnasiri were not happy with this arrangement as they had no departments under them. But I was the exception in that I continued to function with the Treasury within the offices of the Ministry of Finance. When the Attorney General was tasked to look into the grievances of the senior minsters regarding the powers wielded by them I told him that I had no difficulty with that arrangement. MR telephoned to thank me for my observations and added, ominously, that these ad hoc arrangements will alienate his powerful ministers from him for which he will have to pay a heavy price some day. But he rarely went against the advice of his officials even though his political instincts told him otherwise.

As Senior Minister I continued the work I had begun as the Minister of Finance in 2004-2005 with almost the same staff members working under the stewardship of PB Jayasundera. By now PB had become an indispensable cog in the Rajapaksa machine and his word was law in the Finance Ministry and the Central Bank. President Rajapaksa would swear by him. The Governor of the Central Bank was Nivard Cabraal who too was a close confidant of MR. They kept him well informed of the activities in the financial sector.

In turn MR and Gotabaya were grateful that all the demands of the armed services were funded without demur during the Northern war due to the skill and commitment of the officials in the Treasury. The activities of the Tamil diaspora which was carrying on a hostile campaign spilled over to our negotiations with the IMF and World Bank. Their lobbyists were constantly calling for the curtailing of economic assistance to Sri Lanka. Canada was particularly problematic. It had been one of our major partners in development assistance during the Sirimavo and JRJ years. But due to diaspora lobbyists and our inefficient Foreign Service this aid had been reduced to a trickle even at a time when Canada was stepping up its funding for Third World countries.

Since I had studied in a Canadian University I was a regular invitee for social events organized by the Canadian High Commission here. So I could sense the embarrassment of their representatives when they had to follow the obviously biased “line” which was embodied in their instructions from home. The close links we had with CIDA (Canadian International Development Association) and the Canadian “think tanks” had been snapped. There were similar signals from the Scandinavian countries which were our strong development partners in the days gone by.

As Senior Minister I resumed my role which began in 2004 as chief interlocutor with the global financial institutions. This meant that I had a busy travel schedule to facilitate my interactions with the multilateral organizations like IMF, World Bank and ADB. In addition I undertook visits to promote bilateral assistance. These were mostly to donor countries like India, China, Japan, UK and USA. In all these countries we established good relations with the leaders and staff of Central Banks and Export-Import banks [Exim banks] which dealt with the details of financial assistance.

In addition I had to accompany the President or Prime Minister on his state visits since many of the bilateral issues discussed pertained to economic affairs. I can recall such visits to China [Beijing, Shanghai, Guandong] South Korea [Seoul], Russia [St. Petersburg] and Japan [Tokyo]. These state tours involved much more ceremonial than our matter of fact discussions with foreign financial authorities during my bilateral working visits. Then the only other Sri Lankan participants were drawn from our missions in those host countries.

They were officers who had handled economic subjects on our behalf. One of our sad discoveries was that many of our Ambassadors did not get personally involved in these matters and preferred to delegate such tasks to a senior officer in his office. In time the quality of such supporting staff declined and we had to bear the brunt of even the “donkey work” which is usually delegated to the embassy. To make matters worse senior positions in the embassies had been mostly assigned to political appointees who were not competent to help us.

However since we had our own officials and Central Bank officers in our delegation we could get by even though we had to burn midnight oil. Many were the major development projects that we had successfully negotiated. Now when I drive past some of those land mark infrastructure projects I recall how a few of us sat across a table in a distant land to begin the discussion on the manner of funding that project as a first step in getting it off the ground.

One of the most interesting of these state visits with MR was to St. Petersburg, cradle of the Russian revolution which was later renamed Leningrad by the Soviet regime. This was the capital of the Romanov Czars and their aristocratic coterie before the Russian revolution of 1917. The rulers occupied the Winter Palace which was stormed by the revolutionary workers led by the Bolsheviks with Lenin as their leader. Lenin had arrived in a sealed train arranged for him by the Germans who thought that he would help in destabilizing their enemy – Czar Nicholas who was waging a war against them.

Lenin arrived at the Finland station in Petersburg and making use of the abysmal living conditions of the workers, peasants and the ill equipped Russian army and navy, raised the “banner of revolt “which led to the fall of the monarchy and the elimination of the Romanovs. It was a model of the politicization of violence which historians attribute to Leon Trotsky’s establishment of the Red Army and its conquest of the distant territories and their integration with the new state of “Socialist Soviets”. Today the Winter Palace by the river Neva is a museum and we were lucky to be given a guided tour of it by the museum director. We also visited the Hermitage to view a fabulous collection of impressionist art which could only be rivaled by the paintings exhibited in the Orangerie in Paris. The military and artistic elite under the Czars looked to France as a beacon of modern art and culture. Indeed many of them spoke French as their second language as testified by the large number of Russian exiles in Paris. They tended to congregate in Paris 15 which is full of Orthodox churches, cafes, clubs, art houses and restaurants serving Russian cuisine so beloved of the emigre “White Russians”.

My secretary in UNESCO Paris, Nadia came from an emigre Russian family and she directed me to their best eateries and cultural events in Paris 15. The heyday of Russian ballet was in Petersburg from which emerged Diaghalev the manager of the Ballet Russe and his temperamental protege the dancer Nijinsky. In the St. Petersburg harbour we could see the “Aurora” the legendary ship of the sailors who refused to fire on the workers led by Lenin and instead trained their guns on the Czarists.

The harbour and the city figures also in one of the most harrowing, as well as heroic, events in the history of Russia namely the siege of Petersburg [or then Leningrad] by the Nazi army. This ruthless blockade deprived the citizens of basic amenities including food. Finally they were forced to survive on two slices of bread a day. There is a monument to commemorate this event in which the centre piece is a glass case showing two slices of bread. We went there in the bitter cold but could not but be moved by the sacrifices and heroism of the Soviet people and the Communist party.

The harbour in Petersburg was the main sea port of the Russians of that time. Even today it is an important opening to western Europe and the Scandinavian countries with Finland as its closest neighbour. The earliest tea traders in Russia imported Ceylon tea through this harbour. The major importer of tea in Petersburg whose company distributed it to the rest of Russia from the time of the Czars, had his office in the city. He entertained our Presidential team at a magnificent lunch in the top ranking old hotel in the capital.

It was a grand example of the old times when fabulous meals were served to the elite with no expenses spared. The building was in baroque style and the interior decor had all the opulence of Czarist times. But while the lunch was going on there was a conspiracy being hatched by the Presidents PA and confidante Sajin Vas Gunawardene with the cautious support of Nivard Cabraal against our Ambassador to Russia and President’s cousin Udayanga Weeratunga – all unknown to MR.

In addition to state visits with the President, I had to undertake several visits to Beijing to expedite the release of funds for Chinese supported projects in Sri Lanka. Though the general impression is that China forced us to take loans the truth is far from that. The Chinese Import and Export Bank which oversaw the funding was always cautioning the local counterparts to undertake detailed feasibility studies before projects were submitted to them. While the local sponsors were calling for quick action the Exim Bank usually held back till they finished their own investigations.

Another problem was that our initial estimates were understated to make for easy acceptance by our authorities. Half way through the implementation of the project, cost estimates had to be revised and the amount of the loan revised upwards. This entailed delays and interruption of work. The politicians who pressed for those projects then complained of delays and urged the Finance Ministry to expedite their negotiations with the Chinese Bank. MR was always urging PB Jayasundera to expedite the funding of his projects. PB in turn would call for quickening the release of funds. This often took me to Beijing because due to protocol the Bank would give a Ministerial delegation preference.

We were lucky to have the late Kirthi Amunugama as our Ambassador in Beijing at that time. He was always knocking at the door of the Bank’s Chairman to accommodate us. This system worked well and it took me on several visits to Beijing to claim preference in meeting Chinese authorities. Hotel Beijing was our port of call and we were well known to the staff including the barbers who had been in the business from the early days of the revolution and boasted of cutting the hair of leaders like Chou En Lai and Deng Hsiao Ping.

Beijing outside the official circuit is quite different and offers many rare experiences. One is a drive round the new ring road with a view of the newly developed areas leading to the Olympic village with its famous “Bird’s Nest” National Stadium and large assembly halls. Another view is of the new buildings erected for the Beijing Olympics. I was invited for the Beijing Olympics together with DM Jayaratne, the then Prime Minister. It was an architectural wonder in addition to being an event which was enacted with pin point precision.

Earlier global media had cast doubt on China’s ability to mount such a major event. But all that was dispelled from the spectacular opening to the ceremonial ending. A large number of iconic buildings were erected and after the Olympics they were used for state business. One such meeting in a spectacular new conference complex was held to launch the “Belt and Road initiative” by Xi Jinping. I attended it with Ranil who was then Prime Minister.

There we had a meeting with Aung San Suu Kyi who was the leader of the Myanmar delegation. While chatting I asked her about my Trinity schoolmate Micheal Aung who with his brother, both Christians, were sent by their father to study in Kandy. She only remembered that they had been in the Burmese administration many years ago. I also told her about the “Burmese Rest” in Trincomalee street close to Trinity which hosted Burmese pilgrims who had come to worship at the Temple of the Tooth. She was an amiable lady with a slight British accent, who had been thrust into Burmese politics in order to safeguard the heritage of her father Aung San, a national hero who had been murdered by reactionary elements.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.