Ben Stokes: England captain to retire from international cricket after New Zealand series

sky sports - The announcement was made during the afternoon session on the fourth day of the series decider at Trent Bridge, while he was bowling, with Stokes then taking a wicket with the first ball after the news broke.

The Durham all-rounder made his white-ball debut in 2011 and his Test debut during the 2013/14 Ashes series in Australia, with Stokes captaining the Test side since April 2022.

Stokes' future was questioned when he was left out of the second Test against New Zealand earlier this month, following an investigation into an incident in a London nightclub.

The 35-year-old returned as captain for the series decider against New Zealand, where he told England team-mates of his decision to end his glittering international career before the fourth day against the Black Caps.

In a message to the England team before day four, Stokes said: "This is my last two days as your captain and the last two days representing England.

"The reasons can wait why, but I've had many trips to the well before for this team, for you blokes, for people beforehand and I've got one more trip to do.

"We've got a lot of hard work to do and the only thing I want is to be able to walk off that field, regardless of the result, knowing that I've had this group give everything for the last two days.

"That's the only thing I want is for everyone to give it, not only for me, selfishly, but also for this team and everything else we've got going forward for you blokes.

"I've got the emotional side out of it. Now it's time to go to work. Please, everyone else come with me."

Stokes - who has made 122 Test appearances for England - is one of only two players in history to score over 7,000 runs and take over 250 wickets in Tests.

He walked off the field to a standing ovation at tea, shortly after his retirement had been announced, with Stokes then receiving a guard of honour from his England team-mates as he returned to the field for the evening session.

Stokes has been involved in numerous generational highlights during his lengthy England career, firing an unbeaten 84 during the 2019 ICC World Cup final against New Zealand that was won in a Super Over.

His highest Test score was a brutal 258 off 198 balls against South Africa in 2016, while his unbeaten 135 at Headingley during the third Ashes Test against Australia in 2019 dragged England to one of their most dramatic victories.

Richard Thompson, ECB chair, said: "Ben Stokes leaves the international game as one of England's greatest-ever cricketers and one of the defining figures of his generation.

"His performances under pressure, his relentless competitiveness and his ability to produce the extraordinary when it matters most have given me and millions of other fans memories that will endure forever.

"Beyond his remarkable achievements on the field, his performances have inspired many youngsters to embrace cricket with positivity and belief. We are losing a batsman, a bowler, a captain and a talisman."

Former England bowler Stuart Broad added on Sky Sports Cricket: "He was incredible [to play with]. It always had that feeling that he'd run through a brick wall, as he has done so many times.

"He wants to be in the game at all times, whether it's easy or hard. It was almost as if the harder it got, the more he wanted to bat or bowl. As a team-mate, you can't help but respect him and love him."

He took on the captaincy role permanently in 2022 alongside new head coach Brendon McCullum, with the pair immediately prompting a change in fortunes as England played a new, exhilarating, attacking brand of cricket dubbed 'Bazball'.

After winning just one of their prior 17 Test matches, England won nine of their next 10 under Stokes and McCullum to claim three-straight series wins - which included a stunning victory in Rawalpindi - where they scored a record 506 on day one - as part of a 3-0 whitewash of Pakistan.

Under Stokes, England pulled off their two highest run-chases in history (378 vs India, Edgbaston, 2022; 371 vs India, Headingley, 2025), while four of their top-10 chases came under his captaincy.

England could only draw home Ashes series against Australia in 2023 and 2025 and were handily beaten 4-1 down under last winter, with Stokes initially eager to continue as captain after surviving the inquest that followed a heavy series defeat.

He led the team back to winning ways against New Zealand at Lord's to start the summer, before being "frustrated and disappointed" by the fallout from the nightclub saga that saw him left out of the second Test. He returned for the series decider but has now called time on his international career.

Richard Gould, ECB chief executive officer, added: "Ben Stokes has made an immeasurable contribution to English cricket, not only through his exceptional skill as one of the world's finest all-rounders, but through the commitment, resilience and passion he has demonstrated throughout his international career.

"His influence has extended far beyond statistics - inspiring team-mates, supporters and young cricketers around the world through his leadership and unwavering desire to win. We are enormously grateful for his service to England and congratulate him on an extraordinary international career.

"His contribution to the game will be celebrated for many years to come."