Rajiv & The Clan … expanding

Rajiv & The Clan is an extremely popular outfit, not only in Sri Lanka, but abroad, as well, and they have been operating for over three decades.

They’ve had the opportunity to perform globally, including in the UK, Europe, Dubai, and Oman.

In fact, this versatile outfit will be celebrating their 35th anniversary this year and they are working on making a big sound about it.

Of course, as it generally happens, over the years, there have been changes in the lineup, but this time Rajiv is branching out … from a five-piece outfit to seven members; and, probably eight, in the new year, with a female vocalist.

Says Rajiv: “Seeing bands in the calibre of Harold Seneviratne Combo, Peter Prins Combo, Talk Of The Town, and Desmond And The Clan, as a young school leaver, I always had a desire to strengthen my band with a horn section.

“With the preparations of celebrating our 35th Anniversary, I managed to fulfill my dream with the inclusion of young Osanda De Silva on trumpet and Buddhika Wickramasinghe on sax, in addition to the experienced Anton Fernando on keys, Nishantha Pradeep on lead, Dharshana Mawala on bass and Asha Asanga on drums.”

Rajiv Sebastian: Always had a desire to strengthen The Clanwith a horn section

Rajiv went on to say that Rajiv And The Clan is the second most senior existing western band, after the Gypsies.

While planning their Anniversary World Tour to Europe, the UK and Australia, early next year, the band is scheduled to celebrate 35th year in showbiz by way of a mega concert on 21st December, 2025, at Musaeus College Auditorium.

The concert will also feature Amarasiri Peiris, Bandula Wijeweera, Sohan Weerasinghe, Luke Henricus, Piyal Perera and Shenal Nishshanka (Gypsies fame), Corrine Almeida, Damian Wikkramatillake and Tashni Perera.

According to Rajiv, each artiste will perform their very own popular hits plus an original composed by Rajiv.

There will also be a special guest appearance, with a medley of Calypso hits, featuring Raymond Fonseka (Samanalay), Priya Peiris (La Bambas), Errol Fernando (Los Cabellarose) and Sepala Gunasekara (Buzzing Bees).

Led by Rajiv Sebastian, who’s known for his versatility as a singer, The Clan is noted for their energetic live performances and catchy music that appeals to a wide audience – a mix of classic hits and original songs.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.