Opposition stages joint rally in Nugegoda as leaders vow to topple Govt.

Several opposition parties staged a protest rally,The “Maha Jana Handa” against the Government yesterday at the Ananda Samarakoon Open Air Theatre in Nugegoda. – Pix by Shehan Gunasekara

Namal Rajapaksa says rally serves public interest; warns State officials against political bias and vows to build public momentum to topple Govt.

Harin Fernando hails Namal Rajapaksa, praises former Presidents Mahinda and Ranil for past achievements and questions the capability of the current leadership

Udaya Gammanpila declares rally as start of a larger movement, claims it has rocked the Govt.

Sugeeswara Bandara accuses President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and his MPs of attempting to undermine country’s Buddhist culture

Chamara Sampath Dassanayake says opposition will decide its leader in due course, dismisses Government concern over that choice; challenges Public Security Ministry leaders to reveal their qualifications

Several opposition parties yesterday held a joint protest rally under the banner “Maha Jana Handa” at the Ananda Samarakoon Open Air Theatre in Nugegoda, marking a rare moment of cross-party mobilisation against the Government.

The rally brought together representatives from the UNP, SLFP, SLPP, PHU and the New Democratic Front (NDF). However, key opposition players including the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB), Sarvajana Balaya, and the National Freedom Front (NFF) were notably absent.

SLPP National Organiser Namal Rajapaksa, addressing the crowd, said the objective of the gathering was not personal gain, but the public interest shared by all participating political parties.

He warned senior State officials, including the IGP and public servants, who act beyond their duties in favour of the Government to continue their jobs diligently, insisting that political issues would be resolved politically.

He accused the Government of turning a blind eye to the plight of farmers, stating: “Those who once worked in the paddy fields wearing a loin cloth are now in Parliament wearing suits, neglecting the farmers of this country.” He criticised delays in fertiliser distribution and warned the Government “not to harm the farming community of this country.”

Rajapaksa also vowed to build public momentum to oust the Government. “A ship is not built to stay anchored in the harbour. We will create strong public opinion and at the first opportunity we get, we will topple this Government,” he said.

UNP Deputy Secretary General of Political Mobilisation Harin Fernando referred to Namal Rajapaksa as the “Prince of the Stage” and a key second-tier SLPP leader.

He said former Presidents Mahinda Rajapaksa, who ended the 30-year war, and Ranil Wickremesinghe, who stabilised the economy during the crisis, must be remembered.

He questioned the capacity of the current leadership, asking: “What kind of a fool is he when there are leaders like this?”

PHU leader Udaya Gammanpila said the rally marked the beginning of a larger political movement. He claimed the event had “rocked the Government,” which he alleged held a separate meeting in Tangalle on Thursday attended only by people “brought in by the Police.”

He asserted the Government had believed it could remain in power another four years but vowed: “We won’t let that happen.”

Former Private Secretary to Gotabaya Rajapaksa, Sugeeswara Bandara, claimed President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and his 159 MPs of wanting to “harm the Buddhist culture of this country.”

NDF MP Chamara Sampath Dassanayake said the opposition would “make a leader” when the time comes, and install him in the Presidential seat, adding that the Government need not concern itself with who that person will be. He also questioned the qualifications of Public Security Minister Ananda Wijepala and Deputy Minister Sunil Watagala, challenging them to disclose their academic credentials before raising questions about Namal Rajapaksa’s legal qualifications.

Meanwhile, the Police Media Division issued a statement regarding the use of loudspeakers during the rally, citing the ongoing GCE Advanced Level examination held yesterday from 8.30 a.m. to 11.40 a.m. and 2.00 p.m. to 5.10 p.m. at nearby examination centres. Police instructed organisers to restrict loudspeaker use strictly within the premises to avoid disturbing students. Later, Police officers removed loudspeakers installed outside the authorised area.