JXG delivers LKR 3.2 Bn PAT, driven by 19% revenue growth in 9M FY26

JXG (Janashakthi Group) reported a solid performance for the nine months ended 31 December 2025 (Q3 FY26), with consolidated Group net profit after tax rising to LKR 3.2 billion, surpassing the LKR 2.9 billion recorded in the corresponding period last year. Group revenue grew 19.2% year-on-year to LKR 21.9 billion, while total assets stood at LKR 163 billion, reflecting sustained balance sheet strength and disciplined growth.

Commenting on the Group’s performance, Chandan de Silva, Group Chairman of JXG (Janashakthi Group), said: “The Group’s performance over the first nine months of FY26 reflects the strength of our portfolio approach and the clarity with which we continue to build Janashakthi as an integrated financial services group. Our focus has been on creating scalable platforms, strengthening governance and ensuring that each business is well-positioned to capture opportunities across market cycles. The consistency we are seeing across the Group underscores the resilience of our strategy and confidence as we move into the final quarter of the financial year.”

Revenue contributions for the year-to-date period were driven by First Capital Holdings (LKR 11.4 billion), Janashakthi Insurance (LKR 6.1 billion) and Janashakthi Finance (LKR 4.4 billion), highlighting the breadth of revenue generation across the Group’s core financial services businesses.

Ramesh Schaffter, Managing Director / Group CEO of JXG (Janashakthi Group), commented: “We are pleased to begin the new calendar year by reporting a strong performance for the Group for the nine months ended, reflecting positive momentum across the last three quarters. This performance positions us firmly as an emerging financial services group and stands as proof to disciplined strategy execution and the robust contributions of our subsidiaries during the period. As we move into the final quarter of the financial year, we do so with confidence, building on a strong foundation and readiness to embrace the next phase of growth.”

First Capital Holdings PLC recorded a Total Comprehensive Income of LKR 3.2 billion, compared to LKR 4.5 billion in the corresponding period last year. The performance reflects mark-to-market gains that were moderate during the period under review compared to previous quarters and periods. While the primary dealing and corporate dealing securities divisions reported a combined PAT of LKR 3.6 Bn, the stockbroking division recorded a Profit After Tax of LKR 166 million for the nine months ended 31 December 2025, up from LKR 39 million in the corresponding period last year.

Janashakthi Insurance PLC, which reports on a December financial year-end, closed the year with a PAT of LKR 3.4 billion. Gross Written Premiums increased 31% year-on-year to LKR8.7 billion, up from LKR 6.6 billion in the corresponding period. The New Business Premium growth of 67% affirms the continued momentum in core insurance operations.

Janashakthi Finance PLC recorded an PAT of LKR 240 million, with Net Operating Income rising 35% year-on-year to LKR 2.2 billion.

Ceylinco Life leads life insurance market for 22nd year with premium income of Rs. 44.18 Bn.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.