Auction offerings fall to two-year low of 4.8 M/Kgs

Auction offerings totalled 4.8 M/Kgs and the lowest quantity on offer since Sale No. 16 of  22/24 April 2024 (4.7 M/Kgs). Overall market sentiment remained fairly similar to the previous week, notwithstanding a much smaller volume on offer.

Ex-Estate offerings comprised of 0.6 M/Kgs, down from the 0.7 M/Kgs on offer the previous week. A selection of the better teas continued to sell well although select high prices of last week were not maintained.

Better Westerns continued to command a premium over the fair average quality teas. Nuwara Eliya BOP/BOPF’s continued sluggish together with the Uda Pussellawas’ which sold poorly following quality. Uva’s – Better BOP’s which had limited availability appreciated by up to Rs. 50 per kg, whilst the corresponding BOPF’s declined by a similar margin.

High & Mid Grown CTC teas – Overall improved market outlook and a Rs. 20-40 per kg appreciation in prices, particularly for the better teas. Low Growns continued to sell well although the Select Best declined by Rs. 20 per kg.

Liquoring teas lacked the support of the Western markets, perhaps due to the limited availability of better teas, whilst shippers to Japan, China, the Middle East and the CIS continued to dominate the sale.

Low Growns totalled approximately 2.2 M/Kgs. Fair demand was witnessed in the Leafy, Semi-Leafy and Tippy categories, whilst the Premium category met with good demand.

In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues, well-made BOP1’s were firm, whilst the balance were easier. Select Best OP1’s together with the Below Best and teas at the bottom sold around last levels, whilst the Best varieties were lower. OP/OPA’s, in general, declined. Select Best and Best PEK’s were selectively dearer, whilst the balance together with the mixed/open varieties were easier. Teas at the bottom and the PEK1’s, in general, were firm.

In the Tippy catalogue, well-made FBOP’s were easier, whilst the clean leaf Below Best and the neat bolder varieties were firm. Balance were dearer. A selection of high-priced FF1’s were firm, whilst the balance were easier. Best and Below Best sold around last levels, whilst the teas at the lower end appreciated in value.

In the Premium catalogue, Tippy teas in general were dearer.