Sri Lanka–Saudi Arabia Business Council debuts

The first-ever Sri Lanka–Saudi Arabia Business Council was launched on 11 November through a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed between the Federation of Chambers of Commerce and Industry of Sri Lanka (FCCISL) and the Federation of Saudi Chambers (FSC), in the presence of the Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Minister Vijitha Herath, at the FSC headquarters in Riyadh.

Sri Lankan Ambassador to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Ameer Ajwad and FSC Chairman Hassan Al-Huwaizi exchanged the MoU signed by Chairman Al-Huwaizi and FCCISL President Keerthi Gunawardane, who participated virtually.

Al-Huwaizi presided over the launching ceremony, with the participation of FSC Assistant Secretary General Mohammed Hattan, Saudi–Sri Lanka Business Council Chairman Abdul Hadi Alqarni, Vice Chairmen Faisal bin Fahad Al-Dakhil and Ayman Ahmed Al-Suhayan, and Business Council Affairs Secretary Shenaha A. Almuqati, representing the FSC.

FCCISL President Gunawardane, Secretary General Tilan M. Wijesooriya, Board Directors Dhammika Lokuge and Dharshaka Rupasinghe, as well as Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Ministry Assistant Director Chiranthi Pothuwewa joined the ceremony virtually representing Sri Lanka.

Minister Herath stated that the establishment of the Sri Lanka–Saudi Arabia Business Council was a fitting tribute to the longstanding economic and business relationship between the two countries, coinciding with the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Sri Lanka and Saudi Arabia. He further stated that this milestone laid the foundation to enhance private sector cooperation between the two countries, establishing a permanent bridge between the two business communities, while aligning with Saudi Vision 2030 and Sri Lanka’s national economic revival initiatives.

Ambassador Ajwad stated that the Sri Lanka–Saudi Arabia Business Council was a long-awaited initiative and the first formal business-to-business (B2B) forum established between the two countries, which would serve as a catalyst for closer and continuous private sector interaction between the two friendly nations.

Alqarni pledged his commitment to promote B2B cooperation in areas of mutual interest including tourism, technology, mining, manufacturing, and agriculture. He also invited Saudi investors to visit Sri Lanka to explore investment opportunities.

Gunawardane highlighted the importance of this long-felt initiative and expressed strong interest in engaging and forging partnerships with the Saudi private sector.