Who guards the guards?

The Opposition and the government have been clashing, in Parliament, for the past several days over what the former describes as the unconstitutional transfer of some of the vital powers of the National Police Commission (NPC) to IGP Priyantha Weerasooriya. The Opposition insists that the IGP has transferred dozens of Officers in Charge of police stations across the country, at the behest of the government, bypassing the NPC. The government has sought to counter the Opposition’s allegation, but its arguments do not sound compelling.

The Constitutional Council (CC) and the Independent Commissions, such as the NPC, were established to act as a countervailing force against the powerful executive presidency and help depoliticise the state service. But these institutions themselves have failed to be above partisan politics, and therefore Sri Lankans are today repeating the question Juvenal asked in the second century AD: Quis custodiet Ipsos custodes—’who guards the guards’?

The CC has failed to live up to the expectations of those who cherish democracy. There have been numerous instances where it functioned as a mere rubber-stamp for executive decisions under successive governments. The current CC is said to be somewhat different, but the Opposition says the government misled it to have someone of its choice appointed the Director General of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption. It behoves the CC to revisit this key appointment. Was the most eligible candidate for the post overlooked for political reasons, as the Opposition has claimed? SJB MP Dayasiri Jayasekera asked for a parliamentary inquiry into what he called the manipulation of the CC process to serve the interests of the government. The Speaker has turned down his request. The CC owes an explanation to the public.

Too much power concentrated in the hands of politicians has been the bane of Sri Lanka, which has experienced socio-political upheavals during governments with steamroller majorities. The SLFP-led United Front government (1970-77) abused its two-thirds majority to extend the life of Parliament by two years besides carrying out various disastrous experiments on the economic front. It crushed the first JVP insurrection. The UNP government, elected in 1977, with a five-sixths majority, institutionalised corruption, political violence and election malpractices while debilitating all democratic institutions. It brutally suppressed the second JVP insurrection. The UPFA government (2010-15) became a metaphor for corruption and abuse of power. The SLPP administration (2020-24), which also had a two-thirds majority bankrupted the country, almost plunging it into anarchy.

All those powerful regimes either introduced new Constitutions or constitutional amendments to further their interests at the expense of the country, and their undemocratic actions gave a big fillip to anti-politics, which is on the rise. The current JVP-led NPP government with a mammoth majority has failed to be different.

Not that the governments without huge majorities have been free from blame, but it was under them that democracy got some reprieve, the 17th Amendment passed during a weak UPFA government in 2001 being a case in point. The UPFA, after securing a two-thirds majority in Parliament, introduced the 18th Amendment, in 2010, restoring the presidential powers which the 17th Amendment had curtailed. Thankfully, the Yahapalana government, which could muster only a wafer-thin majority in Parliament, upended the 18th Amendment by introducing the 19th Amendment. The SLPP government abused its two-thirds majority to introduce the 20th Amendment, effectively nullifying the 19th Amendment. The 21st Amendment, which restored some of the vital features of the 19th Amendment, would not have come into being if not for the debilitation of the SLPP government in 2022 due to a popular uprising.

Neither politicians nor their stooges in uniform must be allowed to usurp the powers vested in the Independent Commissions to pursue their political goals. The Opposition’s complaint to the Speaker that the incumbent IGP has arrogated to himself powers to transfer police officers bypassing the NPC must not go uninvestigated. Unless the government heeds the concerns of the Opposition and pro-democracy groups, they will be compelled to take to the streets. Let the current rulers be warned that protests tend to snowball, and huge parliamentary majorities are no guarantee of the stability of governments.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.