DIMO expands renewable energy portfolio with 18MW solar power addition in Galle

DIMO has successfully developed four new solar power plants in the Galle district, adding a total of 18MW of clean energy capacity to Sri Lanka’s national grid, further strengthening its renewable energy portfolio. The utility-scale solar power plants situated in Rathgama and Akmeemana were developed through fully owned subsidiaries of DIMO as Independent Power Producer (IPP) projects and are now part of the country’s ongoing efforts to expand renewable energy.

The projects include the 3MW Solar Power Plant owned by DIMO Solar Galle Ltd. as well as DIMO Solar Galle Two Ltd., DIMO Solar Galle Three Ltd., and DIMO Solar Galle Four Ltd., each of which adds a further 5MW of solar power capacity to the national grid.

DIMO’s total cumulative solar generation capacity has grown to 25.845 MW (AC) with the inclusion of the new projects, which represents another noteworthy milestone in the company’s ongoing investment in sustainable energy infrastructure. Together, the four solar power plants are predicted to reduce carbon emissions by over 12,945 tCO2e yearly while producing about 31.8 million kWh of clean energy. An estimated 37,937 households will receive electricity from the projects, helping Sri Lanka achieve its long-term objectives for environmental sustainability and energy security.

To ensure reliable and efficient energy generation, the solar power plants use high-efficiency solar photovoltaic panels, Smart Transformer Station technology, utility-scale grid-connected solar PV systems, and modern monitoring systems.

Commenting on the milestone, DIMO Executive Director Wijith Pushpawela, stated, “DIMO’s continued commitment to supporting Sri Lanka’s shift towards sustainable and renewable energy solutions is shown in the addition of this 18MW solar power capacity. These projects support long-term environmental sustainability and national energy security in addition to strengthening the national grid with clean energy.”

These projects further demonstrate DIMO’s commitment to advancing the country’s renewable energy landscape and represent another important milestone in the development of large-scale solar infrastructure in Sri Lanka’s southern region.