WFP and Koica launch usd 10 million “Sow and Grow” project

The United Nations World Food Programme (WFP) has launched a five-year “Sow and Grow” project, supported by USD 10 million from the Korea International Cooperation Agency (KOICA), in partnership with the government of Sri Lanka.

The project aims to strengthen Sri Lanka’s Thriposha programme by boosting the production of high-quality local maize and ensuring a reliable supply of Thriposha for children under five, as well as pregnant and breastfeeding women.

Thriposha is a fortified supplementary food and a longstanding nutrition safety net for vulnerable mothers and children in Sri Lanka. Sow and Grow will boost local maize production, improve quality and strengthen supply chains for sustainable provision of Thriposha.

The project will support 7,500 farmers, in Anuradhapura, Monaragala and Badulla districts, boosting productivity, promoting climate-smart farming, and cutting post-harvest losses. It will connect farmers with aggregators and Sri Lanka Thriposha Limited for better market access and ensure a reliable supply of high-quality maize, helping lower dependence on imports and mitigate climate-related risks.

Sow and Grow is projected to enhance nutrition for more than 650,000 children under five, as well as over 330,000 pregnant and breastfeeding women across the country.

Sow and Grow will be implemented by the World Food Programme in partnership with the Government of Sri Lanka, including the Ministry of Rural Development, Social Security and Community Empowerment, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Trade, Commerce, Food Security & Cooperative Development, and the Ministry of Finance.

CBSL sees no immediate need to curb vehicle imports; reserves above $7bn provide buffer

New Anthoney’s Farms marks third year at Healthy Living Expo

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.