Australia’s contribution boosts WFP emergency response to Cyclone Ditwah in Sri Lanka

Australian High Commissioner for Sri Lanka Matthew Duckworth with WFP Sri Lanka Representative and Country Director Philip Ward, and other Government officials at the air cargo terminal in Bandaranaike International Airport

The United Nations World Food Program (WFP) has scaled up its emergency response in Sri Lanka following the devastation caused by Cyclone Ditwah, thanks to a generous AUD 1.5 million contribution from the Government of Australia.

This support is enabling WFP to deliver life-saving fortified food and provide cash assistance to families most affected by the disaster.

The first airlift of fortified biscuits from WFP’s humanitarian hub in Dubai has already arrived in Sri Lanka, with up to 67 metric tons expected in the coming days. WFP has already dispatched fortified biscuits to Nuwara Eliya and Kegalle and further distributions taking place in Badulla and Kandy, among the hardest-hit districts.

Australian High Commissioner to Sri Lanka Matthew Duckworth said, “Australia stands with Sri Lanka at this devastating time. We are proud to work closely with our longstanding humanitarian partner the WFP, as well as with the Sri Lankan government and local authorities, to rapidly respond to meet the urgent needs of those affected communities.”

WFP’s fortified biscuits provide a quick boost of energy and nutrition when families need it most.

World Food Program Representative and Country Director Philip Ward said, “As rescue operations wind down, our priority is delivering life-saving fortified food to tackle immediate food needs of affected families, targeting especially those most at risk- children, older persons, pregnant and breastfeeding women, and people with disabilities, who often bear the brunt of such crises.”

Australia’s contribution will also fund cash assistance programs, complementing Government efforts to help families meet essential needs and rebuild their lives. WFP continues to appeal for additional donor support to sustain emergency operations and accelerate recovery for communities devastated by Cyclone Ditwah.