CanCham SL outlines pathways to more balanced Canada-SL trade relations

The balance of trade between Canada and Sri Lanka which is in Canada’s favour, could be developed more evenly by promoting to a greater extent trade, investment, tourism and business partnerships between the countries, Canadian Chamber of Commerce in Sri Lanka (CanCham SL) Secretary General Nilupul De Silva said.

‘CanCham SL was established as a dynamic platform to promote trade, investment, tourism and strategic business partnerships between Canada, Sri Lanka and the wider Indo-Pacific Region, Secretary General De Silva explained.

‘The Chamber aims to facilitate stronger commercial engagement while supporting sustainable economic growth and regional collaboration. More than 65 percent of the world’s population resides is in the region, she said at a media conference held at CanCham House, Horton Place recently.

The Secretary General added: ‘The Canadian High Commissioner to Sri Lanka serves as the Patron of CanCham SL, further reinforcing the Chamber’s commitment towards strengthening bilateral and regional economic cooperation.’

‘The Canadian Chamber of Commerce in Sri Lanka proudly participated in a historic milestone with the formal signing of a landmark MOU alongside all Canadian Chambers across the Indo-Pacific region, in the presence of the Canadian Prime Minister Hon. Mark Carney, she said.

‘The agreement signifies a new era of collaboration among the Canadian Chambers of the Indo-Pacific, with a strong focus on strengthening trade and investment ties, enabling strategic resource sharing, enhancing regional cooperation and fostering knowledge exchanges across member chambers and markets, founder and board member CanCham SL M.H.K.M Hammez said.

He said that PM Carney announced a Canadian commitment of CAD 0.5 trillion (CAD 500 billion) towards strengthening Canada’s economic relationship with the Indo-Pacific region over the next decade.

‘Subsequently Canada established a sovereign wealth fund with an allocation of Canadian dollars 25 billion to support long term strategic and international economic initiatives in the region, Hammez said.

‘The Chamber will work closely with business leaders, diplomatic missions, government institutions, investors and industry stakeholders to create meaningful opportunities for Canadian and Sri Lankan enterprises, he added.

‘Not having a permanent Sri Lankan High Commissioner for Canada is one of the biggest issues we are encountering. There is nobody to coordinate and communicate from that end, Hammez said.

‘CanCham is an independent entity trying its level best to promote certain priority development sectors in the country with Canadian support, he explained.

Rupee volatility exposes deeper structural weaknesses, says fintech industry leader

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.