Ceylinco Life opens purpose-built branch in Nittambuwa to enhance customer service

Ceylinco Life has become the first insurance company to open a purpose-built branch on company-owned land in Nittambuwa, reflecting the company’s long-term strategy of investing in high-quality, eco-friendly infrastructure to enhance customer experience and service standards.

The life insurance leader has also taken another step forward in its commitment to sustainable expansion with the opening of this new branch in Nittambuwa, the 34th company-owned building in the company’s island-wide network.

Located at No. 251/B/4, Colombo Road, Horagolla Watta, Nittambuwa, the new branch was declared open recently by Ceylinco Life Chairman Mr. R. Renganathan and Managing Director/CEO Mr. Thushara Ranasinghe, in the presence of directors and senior management.

The spacious three-storey building, with a floor area of 5,750 square feet, has been constructed using the low-cost prefabricated concrete technology developed by the National Engineering Research and Development Centre (NERD). In keeping with the company’s ongoing Green initiative, the Nittambuwa branch incorporates a host of energy-efficient and environment-conscious features, including a rainwater harvesting facility, a sewerage treatment plant that recycles water for toilet flushing and gardening, and energy-efficient lighting and air conditioning systems.

In a first for the company’s branch network, the Nittambuwa building is designed to operate with a 100% self-sufficient solar electricity system that will eliminate dependence on the national grid. The design also maximises natural light and ventilation, uses interlocking blocks with grass to increase greenery, and ensures that no trees were cut during construction. Existing trees were integrated into the building’s layout, the Company said.

The property offers ample parking for more than ten vehicles, a landscaped garden area, and provisions for future expansion. It stands as a model for modern, sustainable construction in the financial services sector.

EduViz International unveils innovative platform to navigate study abroad opportunities

CSE: JF Packaging’s stellar debut eclipsed by broader market slump

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.