WCIC Women Entrepreneur Awards 2025 to be unveiled on 13 Jan.

The Women’s Chamber of Industry and Commerce (WCIC) will host its annual flagship event, WCIC Prathibhabhisheka – Women Entrepreneur Awards 2025, on 13 January 2025 at the Colombo Hilton.

One of the most highly anticipated events on the women-entrepreneurship calendar, the awards celebrate and recognise outstanding women entrepreneurs from Sri Lanka and the SAARC region for their significant contributions to economic growth and development.

WCIC Chairperson Gayani De Alwis said: “We are now in the final days leading up to the event that women entrepreneurs eagerly look forward to each year. Once again, we have seen impressive participation. The evaluation process assesses vision, direction, performance, achievements, and overall contribution during the 2024/25 period. In keeping with WCIC’s regional outlook, we also recognise exceptional women entrepreneurs from the SAARC region. The 2025 awards mark the fourth edition in the new format, which encourages strategic thinking, sound financial practices, strong governance, and the promotion of women-owned and women-led businesses.”

Organising Committee, Co-Chairs Nilani Seneviratne and Tusitha Kumarakulasingam said: “We are putting the final touches to what promises to be another exceptional event—both in terms of the calibre of winners being showcased and the overall delivery. We are proud to lead this national initiative that honours women entrepreneurs across Sri Lanka and the SAARC region. This year’s program has attracted a diverse range of businesses—from start-ups and micro enterprises to small, medium, and large organisations—representing all nine provinces. Gold, Silver, and Bronze awards will be presented in each category for performance during 2024/25, along with a ‘Best of the Province’ award recognising the most outstanding entrepreneur from each province.”

The event will also feature a series of special awards, including: Young Woman Entrepreneur, Most Outstanding Start-Up, Woman of Courage, Most Outstanding Export-Oriented Entrepreneur – Product and Services, Best of the SAARC Region

The highlight of the evening will be the announcement of “The Woman Entrepreneur of the Year – 2025.”

WCIC Prathibhabhisheka – Women Entrepreneur Awards 2025 is supported by an esteemed group of partners: Platinum Partner: AIA Insurance, Diamond & Banking Partner: DFCC ALOKA, Gold Partners: McLarens Group, Unilever Arunallla, Silver Partners: Hayleys PLC, Maliban, Bronze Partners: Impra Teas,  Macbertan, Print and Digital Media Partner: Wijeya Newspapers Ltd., Creative Partner: Triad, Knowledge Partner: Ernst & Young and Hospitality Partner: Colombo Hilton.