President reviews national anti-narcotics drive

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake yesterday reviewed the progress of the national anti-narcotics drive at the third meeting of the “A Nation United” National Steering Council, a body set up to coordinate efforts to eradicate drug abuse in the country, the President’s Media Division said.

Addressing the Council, the President noted that just as the country’s physical development is important, the wellbeing and stability of society are equally vital, and that every citizen must discharge their responsibilities to eradicate the drug menace from Sri Lanka as it has escalated into a national disaster.

With the objective of uprooting the widespread drug problem in the country through a multi-pronged approach, disrupting drug supply island wide, expanding raids, rehabilitating those addicted to drugs, implementing prevention programs aimed at curbing drug use and empowering communities against drugs, the national operation “Quit - A Nation United” is being implemented under the theme “A Drug-Free Nation – A Happier Tomorrow.”

This initiative is being carried out as a united national front comprising the Government, security forces, civil organisations and all citizens, with the aim of creating massive social pressure against drug traffickers and distributors, while rehabilitating users of narcotic drugs.

At the meeting, extensive discussion took place on the progress of ongoing raids, arrests and rehabilitation processes relating to drugs. The President expressed his appreciation to all institutions, officers and members of the public dedicated to this cause.

It was revealed that during the period from 1 January 2025 to 5 January 2026, the following quantities had been seized:

In line with decisions taken at the previous meeting, attention was also drawn to the progress of drafting new laws to ensure the speedy destruction of seized drug stocks and the President instructed the relevant authorities to expedite this process. The progress in destroying the drugs currently in custody was also discussed.

The need to identify the social background of persons addicted to drugs and to conduct a survey to collect relevant data was also taken up for discussion.

Deliberations were further held on establishing a strong mechanism involving educational institutions, Government bodies, voluntary organisations and cultural organisations to expand the implementation of this national program.

In addition, the meeting discussed conducting public awareness programs with the involvement of religious leaders, making use of the close link between villages and places of worship.

The Maha Sangha led by the Most Venerable Niyangoda Vijithasiri Thera (Anunayake of the Malwathu Chapter), the Most Venerable Narampanawa Ananda Thera (Anunayake of the Asgiriya Chapter), the Most Venerable Waleboda Gunasiri Thera (Anunayake of the Ramanna Maha Nikaya) and the Most Venerable Kuppiyawatte Bodhananda Thera, as well as religious dignitaries including Fr. Nishantha Fernando, Sri Velu Suresh Sharma Kurukkal, Muthusamy Alagesan Kurukkal and Maulavi Ash-Sheikh M. Arkam Nooramith, participated in the meeting.

Also present were the Public Security and Parliamentary Affairs Minister Ananda Wijepala, Secretary to the President Dr. Nandika Sanath Kumanayake, Senior Additional Secretary to the President Roshan Gamage, Secretary to the Ministry of Defence, Air Vice Marshal Sampath Thuyacontha (Retd), among several others.