Hilton Samarasinghe: The man who gave faces to the dead

Sri Lanka faced its worst air disaster over 50 years ago when all 191 passengers and crew of a Martinair flight were killed. The island was then confronted with the grim task of identifying the disintegrated remains long before DNA testing was invented.

Enter Hilton Samarasinghe, one of the most respected forensic technical officers of the time. He was also the only Sri Lankan police officer then trained at Scotland Yard in facial reconstruction and identification, a giant leap in crime solving.

The Martinair DC-8 aircraft was approaching the Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) on its way to Jeddah with 182 passengers and nine crew when it went down in Maskeliya. It crashed into the fifth mountain in the Seven Virgins range on the night of December 4, 1974.

The chartered aircraft was due to stop at BIA for refuelling after taking off from Surabaya, Indonesia. It came down 40 nautical miles (75 kilometres) from the runway at BIA.

Samarasinghe was tasked with identifying the mutilated victims. Using technology considered cutting-edge before DNA testing, he painstakingly sorted the remains. He photographed skulls and other bone fragments and superimposed them on photographs supplied by next of kin. His work helped provide closure for grieving families.

Before photographing the skulls, he had to remove the remaining traces of flesh. Some of this work was carried out in Samarasinghe’s workshop at his home on Vihara Mawatha in Kolonnawa.

As a neighbour and classmate of his son Sujeeva – who later became a surgeon before giving up medicine to pursue a more lucrative career in IT — I had the rare opportunity to witness the grisly, gut-wrenching process of handling cadavers of air crash victims.

Samarasinghe later recalled his visit to the crash site. It was a macabre scene straight out of a horror film. He was the first to photograph the scene. Only a few people had cameras then, unlike today, when almost everyone carries a smartphone with a good-quality cam.

On his centenary birth anniversary, I cajoled Sujeeva to share some of his memories of his father who was a powerful force in criminal investigations during his time. He was born on May 15, 1926 and passed away on March 12, 1979 just as Sujeeva entered his GCE AL class.

Professionally, Samarasinghe was a senior technical officer in the Police Department, working with the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) as its official photographer. He was the first to be trained in extracting finger prints from decomposed bodies to enable positive identifications.

Samarasinghe was a silent hero of the Police Department at a time when integrity and fairness not only mattered but were fiercely guarded. It was an era when expert witnesses did not bow to political pressure. In more recent times, by contrast, Judicial Medical Officers have doctored autopsy reports to suit political masters, as in the murders of Lasantha Wickrematunge and Wasim Thajudeen. The credibility of expert witnesses like Samarasinghe was unquestioned. Sadly, that level of steadfast integrity has become a distant memory.

One of the first cases Samarasinghe helped solve was the 1954 “Balagollagama murder” of a jeweller, K. Rasiah alias Arunachalam, in Puttalam district. He was able to positively identify the murder victim using the super imposition of a photo of the victim over a photo of the skull that was recovered.

In April 1966, Dodampe Mudalali died after “falling from the fourth floor of police headquarters”. He had been interrogated by the CID following his arrest on charges of conspiring against the then UNP government. Police insisted that Dodampe Mudalali had jumped from a window and committed suicide, a conclusion upheld at the first inquest.

However, following intense public protest and forensic scrutiny, it was established that he had been thrown from the fourth-floor window after being tortured. The verdict was changed from suicide to homicide, a major success, although no one was convicted after a politically-charged trial.

Samarasinghe had constructed a dummy matching Dodampe Mudalali’s physique and by dropping it from the same height, he demonstrated the clear difference between a voluntary jump and a body being forcibly pushed. He could have created a case to exonerate his fellow CID colleagues, but he stood on the side of justice.

It was Hilton Samarasinghe who also helped identify the remains of his CID colleague Inspector T. L. B Bastianpillai, one of the early victims of Sri Lanka’s Tamil separatist war in April 1978.

As a fingerprint expert, he established the identities of the mutilated bodies of Bastianpillai, his Sub Inspector Perampalan, Sergeant Balasingham and police driver Siriwardena. Their bodies had been dumped in a well at Murunkan in the Mannar district.

Apart from his crime-busting work, Samarasinghe was also a legendary photographer, well known for documenting wildlife as well as for taking wedding photographs in colour — a rarity then.

He had a passion for wildlife photography, which he pursued with a budding politician at the time — Ranasinghe Premadasa — who went on to become president in 1989, nearly a decade after Samarasinghe’s death.

Wedding photography was a side hustle. Samarasinghe was among the first to record moving images in Sri Lanka using 8mm colour film reels. This was long before the Sony Handycam. Samarasinghe’s son Sujeeva recalls the Wettasinghe family of Electro Plastics fame importing an 8mm movie camera for him to use at one of the family weddings. Among those who drew on his professional skills were the Dharmadasa family of the Nawaloka group, Hasthagiri Mudalali, Abeyratne of Sweety Toffees, and Jafferjee Brothers, who also had a textile factory close to Samarasinghe’s Kolonnawa home.

“I think he was the very first to film weddings in Sri Lanka, long before video became common,” Sujeeva recalled. “It was in colour on 8mm film, without sound. The films had to be sent to England for processing.”

His light man was a nephew, Lakshman Wijesekera, who went on to become a singer, composer and actor.

“He had a home-made metal rig to hold four floodlights for his Super 8mm filming. As you can imagine, the metal frame wasn’t a great idea… I actually got seriously electrocuted while holding it, standing barefoot,” his son Sujeeva said. “I still have that burn scar on my right index finger. Those were the days.”

(Amal Jayasinghe was a neighbour of the Samarasinghe family in the 1970s Hilton Samarasinghe born on 15 May 1926 Died 12 March 1979)

OPA Facilitates Brainstorming Session on Harnessing Digital Transformation for Inclusive Development

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.