IMF to Sri Lanka: 2026 Budget must align with programme parameters

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced yesterday, that its staff have reached a staff-level agreement with Sri Lankan authorities on the fifth review of the country’s Extended Fund Facility (EFF) arrangement. Once the review is approved by the IMF Executive Board, Sri Lanka will have access to another tranche of about US$347 million in financing (approximately US 2 billion up to now).

However, the IMF issued a strong message, emphasising that the upcoming 2026 Budget must be in line with the programme’s parameters to ensure continued fiscal stability.

“The economic reforms implemented by the Sri Lankan authorities have continued to support the recovery, with inflation progressing to target, reserves accumulating, and real GDP growth and revenue mobilisation outperforming expectations,” IMF mission team head Evan Papageorgiou said.

He pointed out that the Sri Lankan economy grew by 4.8 percent in the first half of 2025, and gross official reserves reached US$6.1 billion by the end of September.

“However, the final approval of the review by the IMF Executive Board is contingent on two key factors: the Parliamentary approval of the 2026 Appropriation Bill consistent with programme parameters, and the completion of the financing assurances review, which includes assessing progress with debt restructuring,” he noted.

“The reforms the energy sector will undergo in 2026 and beyond will be very crucial for economic stability and growth,” Papageorgiou added, recommending predictable electricity tariffs for transparency.

On the topic of debt restructuring, Papageorgiou confirmed that processes are underway to finalise agreements with remaining bilateral and commercial creditors for the outstanding $28 billion in external debt.

When asked by The Island about the higher-than-anticipated volume of vehicle imports, estimated at US$1.5-1.8 billion for 2025, Papageorgiou acknowledged the numbers were strong due to pent-up demand. However, he reassured that reserves were not adversely affected. “Central Bank’s reserve target under our programme is ahead of pace, so reserves are not affected because of vehicle imports,” he explained.

He went on to say that new vehicles offset the demand in tourism and other sectors, and vehicle import parameters for 2026 will be discussed with the government and the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

The IMF team concluded its mission by reaffirming its commitment to support Sri Lanka in achieving strong, sustainable growth. During their visit, they met with President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, and other senior government and Central Bank officials.

LMD 100 recognises Hayleys as Sri Lanka’s Leading Listed Corporate for 2024/25

CSE and SEC host exclusive forum to deepen institutional engagement in Sri Lanka’s capital market

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.