‘Where the Kingfisher Waits’ — A Collection of Poems

Where the Kingfisher Waits’ by Nirma de Silva Wijeyeratne is a recently published book which is a collection of poems about journeys inspired by nature, history and place. With evocative description, lived experience and a deep appreciation of natural and cultural heritage, the poet takes the reader from rice fields of golden plumes, to white stupas, to tables overflowing with jasmine and lotus.

One of the acclaimed international authors to comment on the book is Helen Macdonald, the author of ‘H is for Hawk’ which won the Costa Book of the Year award. She has been to Sri Lanka for both the Galle Literary Festival and the Ceylon Literary Festival, experienced Sri Lanka’s nature first-hand and met the poet in Sri Lanka. Commenting on the collection, she says ‘Poems woven from the bonds that draw together memory and place, history and nature in and around our human hearts. De Silva Wijeyeratne possesses an imagist’s eye, a deep awareness of the beauty and complexity of the natural world, and an attentive, careful poetic practice that uncovers a great richness of meaning from what lies all around us.’

The poems published in a 65 page soft cover book celebrate nature in vivid imagery. ‘From an island in the lake, you rise all at once, to form aerial patterns.’ Local words bring authenticity to the setting; ‘by a waterhole under shady kumbuk trees I quietly watch — kingfishers cloaked in skill and turquoise.’ John Gimlette, the author of ‘Elephant Complex’ is another international author who comments on the collection saying ‘Exquisite poems from the heart and the forest. Nirma de Silva Wijeyeratne delicately evokes both the beauty and the sadness of life in these precious lines. I have so enjoyed reading these poems.’

In some poems including ‘When Waterholes Run Dry’ and ‘reflections’ the poet explores the importance of conservation. Author and environmental architect Sunela Jayewardene observes that the collection contains ‘A delicate nostalgia for the loss of lifestyles and landscapes, which along with de Silva Wijeyeratne’s sensitive anticipation of the vulnerability of wild ecologies, pervades these poems… making them a joy to read.’

There are journeys where loss and grief are encountered. In a world of turmoil, moments of stillness show a longing for peace and quietness. The book offers hope as seen in landscape transformations, the poet’s adjustment to life after the loss of her father and the sun setting aglow a goldfinch. Magical moments of simple things remain in the poet’s mind. Ramya Chamalie Jirasinghe, poet and author, says ‘This is a collection that I would carry with me as I go about my day, dipping into it at difficult times, after a harsh commute, when words of others jar, when the world feels desolate. By an evocative and sensitive poetic rendering of nature, place and life, these poems reaffirm the power of life to heal and regenerate.’

Nirma de Silva Wijeyeratne’s work has appeared in UK poetry journals and other publications including Acropolis, Green Ink Poetry, Roots (Wee Sparrow Poetry Press), Amethyst Review, Southlight, The Dawntreader, Southwark Libraries Poetry Pamphlet, Southwark Heritage Blog and The Archaeologist-Architect of Sri Lanka. Her nature-based poems have also appeared in the publications of The London Natural History Society and The Marylebone Birdwatching Society. She has written and performed in Poems from the heart of the urban forest at the Chelsea Fringe Festival, London, with 15 poets. She has participated with other poets at live poetry readings including a reading at the House of Lords, London. She participated in a  Nature Walks and Poetry programme organised by Malabar Hill, a hotel in Sri Lanka where she read her poems at a lowland rainforest and in rice fields. Malabar Hill also supported the publication.

Sanjiva Gautamadasa the GM of Malabar Hill said ‘Malabar Hill supports nature conservation and views poetry as an artistic medium through which nature can be appreciated. We are proud to be associated with this collection of poetry. We will keep a copy of the book in every villa for our guests to enjoy’.

The book is available at bookshops including Sarasavi, Barefoot Bookshop, Rohan’s Bookshop (Liberty Plaza) and Wild & the Sage (Unawatuna) and is priced at LKR 1,100. It is being distributed island-wide by Sarasavi.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.