What is the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution?

Colombo, September 24 (Daily Mirror)-  The much-awaited Twenty-Second Amendment to the Constitution is set to be debated in Parliament this week, with the second reading of the Bill scheduled to continue on Friday (25), following the Supreme Court’s determination that the proposed amendment does not require approval at a referendum.

The Supreme Court’s determination on the 22nd Amendment was communicated to Parliament and announced by Speaker Dr. Jagath Wickramaratne on Tuesday (22). The Supreme Court determined that the provisions of the Bill, or any part thereof, do not require approval by the people at a referendum under Article 83 of the Constitution and can be passed by special majority in Parliament.

The Bill can therefore proceed through Parliament subject to the constitutional requirement applicable to a constitutional amendment. Parliament has scheduled the second reading debate on the 22nd Amendment and the Judicature (Amendment) Bill for Thursday (24) and Friday (25).

The determination was made by a five-member Supreme Court Bench comprising Chief Justice Preethi Padman Surasena and Justices Achala Wengappuli, Arjuna Obeyesekere, Sampath Abayakoon and Gihan Kulatunga.

The proposed 22nd Amendment contains several provisions that would alter the retirement ages of judges of the superior courts and increase the maximum number of judges of the Court of Appeal.

Here are the main provisions of the proposed amendment and the separate Judicature (Amendment) Bill.

1. Increase the retirement age of Supreme Court judges to 67 years from 65.

2. Increase the retirement age of Court of Appeal judges to 65 years from 63.

3. Chief Justice would retire upon reaching 67 years or upon completion of six years from the date of appointment.

4. Six-year limitation on the term of office of Chief Justice would not apply to incumbent Chief Justice.

5. Increase the maximum number of other judges of the Court of Appeal from 19 to 24.

The Supreme Court also determined that the provisions of the Judicature (Amendment) Bill are not inconsistent with the Constitution and can be passed by the simple majority of Parliament.

1. Increase the number of Judges of the High Court from 110 to 120.

2. Increase the retirement age of High Court judges to 63 years from 61.

3. Increase the retirement age of other judges and Magistrates to 62 years.