Study Queensland, Trade and Investment Queensland strengthen global education pathways for Sri Lankan students

Trade and Investment Queensland (TIQ), the Queensland Government’s global business agency, together with Study Queensland, has strengthened its commitment to expanding high-quality international education opportunities for Sri Lankan students through a special two-day engagement programme featuring representatives from five leading Australian universities. Delegates from Griffith University, James Cook University, Bond University, Central Queensland University, and Southern Cross University attended the forum to present their academic offerings, scholarships, student support services, and career-focused pathways tailored for Sri Lankan learners.

“Queensland is recognised globally for excellence in education, innovation, and student support, and we are committed to helping Sri Lankan students access these transformative opportunities,” said Remya Mohanakrishnan, Head – Education (South Asia), Trade & Investment Queensland, India Office (Bangalore). “Our programme in Sri Lanka further strengthens the bridge between our regions and ensures students, counsellors, and education leaders have direct access to the information and pathways they need to pursue successful global careers.”

University representatives highlighted Queensland’s strengths in future-focused disciplines such as health sciences, business, agriculture, engineering, technology, environmental sciences, hospitality, and creative industries. “Our regional universities offer academic specialisations that align with the strengths of the regions in which they operate, forming a direct line of progress for successful students in terms of employability” explained Mohanakrishnan “Students who return to Sri Lanka after they graduate will enrich the industry they choose to work in, proving themselves invaluable to the advancement of key local sectors including Agriculture, Environmental Science and Hospitality”.

Study Queensland, along with its institutions, facilitates great industry exposure and employment opportunities for international students, equipping them for global employability. “There is an excellent reason why the Study Queensland moto is “Start here, go anywhere”, said Mohanakrishnan “We understand that students and their guardians are looking for more than academic excellence. We have created an entire ecosystem in which all students feel supported and secure, giving them the maximum opportunity to thrive”.

Expanding on the extensive career opportunities available in the state, due to Queensland’s natural resources such as critical minerals, as well as established expertise in areas such as sports, infrastructure and technology, Mohanakrishnan projected that career opportunities in the state would multiply in the lead up to the 2032 Olympics, calling it a “genuine golden period”, with proposed projects creating approximately one hundred thousand job opportunities across industries like construction, hospitality and more.

Trade and Investment Queensland (TIQ) is the Queensland Government’s dedicated global business agency, responsible for promoting international trade, investment, and education partnerships. With offices across Queensland and representation in more than 18 international markets, TIQ plays a central role in attracting global talent, supporting the international education and training sector, and connecting students with world-class learning opportunities in Queensland. As a business unit of TIQ, Study Queensland’s mission is to build a strong, sustainable International Education and Training (IET) sector that attracts talent from around the world to study and live in Queensland.  Across the globe and throughout the state, the Study Queensland team offers on-the-ground support to Queensland IET providers seeking opportunities to establish or grow their international presence. Students in Queensland also benefit from Study Queensland’s comprehensive support services, including a 24/7 hotline for international students studying in the state.

CBSL gives approval for NTB’s acquisition of HSBC’s retail banking business in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.