More surprises in the Gulf War

US President Donald Trump has postponed his much-advertised plan to attack Iran’s national grid and critical energy infrastructure for 10 more days as part of his efforts to find an off-ramp with Tehran. He has asked Tehran to declare a ceasefire and come for talks on his own terms or face a series of attacks of unprecedented ferocity. One of his main conditions for negotiations has left the world puzzled; he wants Iran to abandon its nuclear programme, while insisting that he has obliterated Iran’s nuclear potential by destroying all its nuclear facilities and neutralising the threat of the nuclearisation of the Islamic state. If so, he has already achieved his goal, and there is absolutely no need for him to have negotiations with Iran on its nuclear programme, keep on pouring US taxpayers’ money into an endless war, deploy US ground troops to the region and, most of all, continue to cause more economic hardships to the rest of the world.

Trump is apparently without a specific goal or an exit strategy in the ongoing war. He is now trying to have the world believe that he has won the war, and is claiming that Tehran has allowed some oil tankers flying the Pakistan flag to sail through the Strait of Hormuz to appease him! Turning down Trump’s offer to talk, Iran has derisively said the US has been negotiating with itself. Tehran is leveraging everything possible to crank up economic pressure on the US and Israel. It has already made the world economy scream in a bid to turn international opinion against Washington and Tel Aviv. According to unverified reports, it has also threatened to go so far as to target the submarine internet cables in the Red Sea and disrupt global connectivity unless the US and Israel stop attacks. Iran has made no official statement about this issue, but it is capable of severing the undersea fibre-optic cables in case of other Gulf nations continuing to back the US in the ongoing conflict and/or its power and energy facilities coming under attack again. These undersea cables are used for global financial transactions worth trillions of dollars, international communication and data flows, cloud devices, etc., according to media reports. The White House must be under tremendous pressure from the US tech giants and other multinationals to ensure the safety of the submarine cables in the Red Sea.

Meanwhile, the latest developments on the Middle East front may have reminded Trump of former US President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s words of wisdom. An ex-Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force in Europe during World War II, Eisenhower famously said, “Every war is going to astonish you in the way it occurred and in the way it is carried out.” While Trump is trying to have the Strait of Hormuz reopened for international navigation, the threat of another vital chokepoint in the Gulf region being closed has emerged.

The Houthis of Yemen have threatened to close the Bab el-Mandeb Strait, which connects the Red Sea to vital international shipping lanes. The geographical location of this chokepoint has made it vulnerable to Houthi attacks. The Houthis say they are ready to join the war any time. Trump and Netanyahu have already bitten off more they can chew in the Persian Gulf, and how they are going to face the emerging threat is anybody’s guess. The Houthis have a history of disrupting shipping routes.

Airstrikes alone will not help the US, Israel and its allies keep the Hormuz Strait and Bab el-Mandeb Strait open for international navigation. It will be a huge gamble for the US to send its warships and ground troops to gain control of them, for they will be within the Iranian and Houthi missile range.

There seems to be no end to threats and challenges the US and Israel are facing in their war on Iran, and they have plunged the entire world into chaos in the name of their leaders’ dreams. Unacceptable as what Iran is doing by way of retaliation may be, that is the way the cookie crumbles in military conflicts, especially in asymmetrical warfare. The US carried out atomic bomb attacks on Japan purportedly to end a war. Israel has already bombed Gaza back to the Stone Age, but continues to carry out airstrikes in that part of Palestine.

It is up to the US and Israel to make a serious effort to put the genie back into the bottle in the Persian Gulf. Other nations are suffering for no fault of theirs, and eminent economists fear that the world is heading for a global recession.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.