Softlogic GLOMARK expands footprint with all-new outlet at Horton Place

Softlogic GLOMARK, a leading supermarket chain in Sri Lanka, opened its latest outlet located at Horton Place as it continues to expand its footprint across the country.

Conveniently located at 37, Maitland Crescent, Horton Pl, Colombo 07 this is the 15th outlet of the growing GLOMARK chain and offers customers a better shopping experience as they move around in the area. The new outlet was ceremonially declared open by the Softlogic group chairman Ashok Pathirage on the 16th of October, 2025. The event was attended by customers, well-wishers, GLOMARK and Softlogic staff.

The all-new GLOMARK outlet is now open at Horton Place, offering customers a better way to shop for their daily essentials. Whether you’re commuting home, on your lunch break or running errands in the city, GLOMARK at Horton Place is your quick, better, and more convenient stop for everyday needs. You can find a better selection from a wide range of products – from ice creams, snacks, and beverages, to fresh meat and anything you need for a quick grab-and-go. They warmly welcome all customers to visit and experience their latest store.

Softlogic GLOMARK has been in the industry for over 6 years and will be celebrating its 7th anniversary in the middle of November. Softlogic GLOMARK is a part of Softlogic Holdings PLC, a diversified conglomerate in Sri Lanka engaged in ICT, healthcare, retail, financial services, automobiles and leisure. As a revolutionary modern trade retailer in the market, GLOMARK provides an international shopping experience with its access to a wide selection of products sourced from local and international markets coupled with excellent customer service. By opening this new outlet, Softlogic Holdings continues to strengthen its position as a leading force across the full spectrum of retail, offering comprehensive solutions that meet the varied needs of customers nationwide.

Kaspersky Industrial Cybersecurity enhances performance: new capabilities improve network security and operational effectiveness

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.