Outstanding AI & Fintech Governance Leadership Award 2025 for Sopnendu Mohanty

Sopnendu Mohanty, former Chief FinTech Officer of the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) and current Group CEO of the Global Finance & Technology Network (GFTN), has received the Outstanding AI & Fintech Governance Leadership Award 2025 for his global contribution to responsible fintech advancement, cross-border policy innovation, and AI governance.

While the recognition was announced at the Asian Digital Finance Forum & Awards held at Port City Colombo, the formal handing-over ceremony was held recently in Singapore, during the GFTN Insights Forum that took place in parallel with the Singapore FinTech Festival 2025 at Marina Bay Sands Expo & Convention Centre.

Presenting the award, Rajkumar Kanagasingam, Convener of the Asian Digital Finance Forum & Awards and Industry Fellow of the Global Fintech Institute (Singapore), lauded Mohanty’s unique global impact.

“Sopnendu has set global benchmarks in innovation-friendly regulation, Kanagasingam said.

“From cross-border payment connectivity to AI ethics and multi-CBDC frameworks, his leadership has not only shaped Singapore’s fintech ecosystem but has helped entire regions transition into the digital economy responsibly.”

He added that Mohanty’s strategic influence continues beyond regulatory leadership.

“His ability to galvanise central banks, policymakers and innovators onto common platforms is rare. What he built in Singapore is now influencing multiple jurisdictions, and that continuity through GFTN is immensely valuable.”

Serving from 2015 to 2025 as MAS’s inaugural Chief FinTech Officer, Mohanty is widely acknowledged for transforming Singapore into one of the most forward-looking and trusted digital finance environments.

Mohanty has also endorsed Sri Lanka’s initiative to shape the Colombo International Financial Centre (CIFC) at Port City Colombo as a South Asian fintech gateway. He was presented with an interim policy blueprint during the DigiEcon Global Investment Summit.

UNDP, together with partners, brings together immersive insight into the cruel realities of SGBV

Sales team of Maliban Group triumphs at SLIM National Sales Awards 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.