ProFood ProPack and AgBiz 2026 concludes successfully

The 23rd edition of ProFood ProPack and AgBiz 2026, Sri Lanka’s leading exhibition for the food processing, packaging and agriculture sectors, concluded successfully at the BMICH, attracting nearly 30,000 visitors and bringing together industry stakeholders from across Sri Lanka and overseas.

Held from 21 August 2026, the three day exhibition provided a comprehensive platform for businesses, entrepreneurs, industry professionals and consumers to discover new products and technologies, exchange knowledge, build partnerships and explore opportunities across the food processing, packaging and agriculture value chain.

Organised by the Sri Lanka Food Processors Association (SLFPA) in collaboration with professional exhibition organiser Lanka Exhibition and Conference Services Ltd., (LECS) this year’s edition occupied six exhibition halls and featured nearly 450 stalls, with international participation of nearly 30 exhibitors.

The opening ceremony was graced by Industries and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handuneththi and Secretary Thilaka Jayasudara. Their presence reaffirmed the Government’s appreciation of the exhibition and its contribution to the development of Sri Lanka’s industrial and entrepreneurial ecosystem.

A key highlight of this year’s exhibition was the Innovation Pavilion, where 14 Government and private-sector universities showcased research, innovations and technology solutions relevant to the food and related industries.

The Institute of Food Science and Technology Sri Lanka (IFSTSL) also organised an industry seminar and several activities aimed at engaging university undergraduates in food science and technology, strengthening links between academia and industry and encouraging the next generation of food industry professionals.

Highlighting the importance of talent in shaping the future of the industry, Sri Lanka Food Processors Association President Aruna Senanayake said: “The future of food processing depends on having the right people, with the right skills, at the right opportunities.” Reflecting this vision, SLFPA introduced SLFPA Career Connect at the exhibition, creating an industry-focused platform to connect employers with interns, graduates and young professionals seeking career opportunities within the sector.

Further strengthening the exhibition’s focus on industry development, the SME Pavilion, organised by the Ministry of Industries, provided emerging businesses with greater market visibility and opportunities to engage with potential customers and industry stakeholders.

The Knowledge Circle Industry Seminar, organised by SLFPA, provided industry participants with an opportunity to enhance their knowledge through insights and expertise from industry professionals. This year, the organising committee also expanded the Knowledge Hub to include a dedicated Industry Help Desk, serving as an important touchpoint for new entrepreneurs seeking guidance and assistance in identifying business and industry opportunities.

For over 23 years, ProFood ProPack and AgBiz has remained SLFPA’s flagship platform, contributing to the advancement of Sri Lanka’s food sector while supporting innovation, business development and economic growth.

Driven by overwhelming demand and positive feedback from exhibitors and visitors, the organisers have announced plans to expand the venue for next year’s exhibition, creating greater opportunities for exhibitors, businesses and visitors.

The strong response to this year’s event underscores the growing importance of the food and beverage sector in driving innovation, trade and collaboration. With record visitor footfall and strong business outcomes, ProFood ProPack and AgBiz 2026 has further strengthened its position as a leading platform for the food, beverage, processing and packaging industries.

This year’s edition also introduced several engaging attractions designed to enhance the overall visitor experience. Among them was the Home Cooking Challenge, which provided home cooks with an opportunity to prepare creative dishes using products featured at the exhibition. The initiative celebrated culinary creativity while demonstrating the versatility of products and brands participating in the event.

The success of ProFood ProPack and AgBiz 2026 was made possible through the valuable support of its leading industry partners.

The exhibition was supported by Platinum Sponsors: Cargills Ceylon PLC, Multivac Laraon India Ltd., Maliban Biscuit Manufactories Ltd., Nikini Automation Systems, and Pakona Engineers India Ltd.

The event was further supported by Gold Sponsors: Aussee Oats Milling  Ltd., Freelan Enterprises Ltd., and Nestlé Lanka Ltd.

The distinguished group of Silver Sponsors included Akhtari Traders Ltd., Alli Company Ltd., Country Style Foods Ltd., CMC Engineering Export GmbH, Norfolk Foods Ltd., FMJ Holdings, FPT Food Process Technology Co. Ltd., Hayleys Agriculture Holdings Limited, Goma Process Technologies  Ltd., Lablink Ltd., Pro Tec Global Ltd., Maliban Dairy and Agri Products Ltd., Maliban Milk Products Ltd., Nelna Agri Development Ltd., Rancrisp Marketing Ltd., and Zellers – Maliban Biscuit Manufactories Ltd.

ProFood ProPack and Agbiz 2026 Organising Committee Co-Chairs Nadishan Guruge and Sameera Jayathilake on behalf of SLFPA, extended sincere appreciation to all exhibitors, valued sponsors, Government institutions, universities, professional bodies, industry partners, media, visitors and other stakeholders whose support contributed to the successful conclusion of ProFood ProPack and AgBiz 2026.