What Sri Lanka needs most since Ditwah and Middle East war

Cyclone Ditwah, (last November), caused widespread devastation across our island nation.  Entire communities were affected, with an estimated 2.3 million people impacted through the loss of homes, livelihoods and tragically, lives.  Sometimes it feels like the harm caused has been forgotten already.

As some communities continue to rebuild, it is worth reflecting on what lessons can be learned from such events and how we can better prepare for the future.

How many of us connected the dots between this serious adverse weather event, climate change and our own actions as inhabitants of our motherland?

Extreme weather events are becoming more common around the world.  Whether in Sri Lanka or elsewhere, many scientists point to climate change as a significant factor influencing the frequency and severity of these events.  Global warming is not a figment of western imagination.  It raises important questions about how we live, how we consume energy, and how we protect the environment for future generations.

The dark and heavy smog hanging over Colombo like a widow’s veil is not simply brought to us by bad winds blowing in from China or India, as some claim.  It is of our own doing, and we continue to cause more damage to our own collective well-being. Vehicle emissions, ageing public transport fleets, and other sources of pollution affect air quality and public health.  Across the country, the burning of household waste, including plastics can also contribute to environmental and serious health concerns, such as infants developing respiratory diseases and the rise in lung cancer cases.

These are not challenges unique to Sri Lanka.  They are issues faced by many developing nations, but they also present opportunities.  By working together, Government, businesses, civil society organisations and local communities can identify practical solutions that improve quality of life while supporting economic growth.

Sri Lanka has already expressed its commitment to sustainable development and environmental protection, but that is not enough.  The question before us is how all stakeholders can contribute to turning these aspirations into practical action that benefits communities across the country?  We need pro-active pursuit of the 2030 Agenda and the 2050 Net Zero goals.

Recent uncertainty in the Middle East and its impact on global energy markets is a reminder of the importance of energy security.  Expanding renewable energy sources and exploring cleaner transport options, including electric vehicles where appropriate, could strengthen resilience while creating new opportunities for economic development.  The queues of people waiting for fuel cannot be forgotten.  As a nation we must come together and renewable energy solutions should be onboarded fast.

Inclusive development is equally important. Greater participation in the workforce, particularly among women and young people, can unlock talent, increase household incomes and contribute to national prosperity.

The challenges are significant, but so too are the opportunities.  Sri Lanka has the knowledge, the talent and the ability to build a more sustainable (using our resources wisely today without compromising the future of our children and grandchildren), prosperous and resilient future.

To discuss the issues of Sustainability, Clean Energy and Inclusive Development affecting Sri Lanka, The Friends of Sri Lanka Association has convened a meeting at the Sri Lankan High Commission in London on Wednesday 17 June 2026 in the Evening.  Tickets must be purchased in advance via the Eventbrite link: https://srilankasustainabledevelopment.eventbrite.co.uk

Nilmini Roelens LLM, Solicitor will deliver the keynote discourse on some major Sustainable Development Goals of the UN as applied to the Sri Lankan context.  As a Co-founder and CEO of Solar Village SDG, a UK based community interest company, which seeks to promote the Solar Village concept pioneered by Professor I M Dharmadasa in Sri Lanka, this NGO seeks to expand the use of solar power and support sustainable development in remote, rural parts of the country.

If you care about Sri Lanka’s future and the wellbeing of future generations, join the discussion, explore new ideas and meet like-minded people at the reception.

To discuss the issues of Sustainability, Clean Energy and Inclusive Development affecting Sri Lanka, The Friends of Sri Lanka Association has convened a meeting at the Sri Lankan High Commission in London on Wednesday 17 June 2026 in the Evening.  Tickets must be purchased in advance via the Eventbrite link: https://srilankasustainabledevelopment.eventbrite.co.uk