Sri Lanka’s mineral sector investment opportunities promoted in UK

The High Commission of Sri Lanka in London, in partnership with Capital Metals PLC, hosted a joint promotional event to facilitate discussions on emerging opportunities within Sri Lanka’s mineral sector, with particular focus on the Taprobane Minerals Project. The event brought together UK-based investors, corporate representatives, fund managers, and industry specialists for a constructive exchange aimed at fostering dialogue and exploring prospective investment avenues associated with the Taprobane Minerals Project, which is listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange through its Sri Lankan company, Ambeon Capital PLC.

Capital Metals PLC Executive Chairman Greg Martyr, highlighted the strong commercial potential of the company’s high-grade ilmenite resources and outlined the project’s evolution since its launch in 2015, now known as the Taprobane Minerals Project. He noted that recent drilling results have expanded estimated resources nearly fifteenfold in the initial development area, significantly enhancing the project’s economic profile, which includes a base-case IRR of 73% and an NPV8 of $ 180 million. With funding secured beyond the final investment decision stage, the project is set for rapid progress, with commercial operations expected by early 2026 and first production in early 2027.

High Commissioner Nimal Senadheera outlined key policies and economic reforms under the new Government that are strengthening Sri Lanka’s business and investment environment. He highlighted positive trends such as improved foreign reserves, exchange rate stability, growing exports and tourism, and record performance at the Colombo Stock Exchange. He also referenced the forthcoming Investment Protection Act, which will provide additional safeguards for foreign investors. He reaffirmed the Mission’s commitment to supporting the project and invited participants to consider Sri Lanka as their next investment destination through opportunities such as the Taprobane Minerals Project and Ambeon Capital PLC on the Colombo Stock Exchange.

Sri Lanka High Commission Minister (Commercial) Somasena Mahadiulwewa moderated the event. Participants engaged in constructive discussions and networking with Capital Metals PLC on the role of mineral sector development in Sri Lanka, broader economic reforms, potential partnerships, and opportunities for sustainable investment, employment creation, and foreign exchange growth.