A sustainable, inclusive and globally competitive tourism industry can be built through close partnerships and collaboration – PM

The 13th Edition of Sancharaka Udawa 2026, Sri Lanka’s foremost Travel & Tourism Fair held under the patronage of Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya at the Sirimavo Bandaranaike Memorial Exhibition Centre – BMICH, Colombo on Friday [15th May].

Organized by the Sri Lanka Association of Inbound Tour Operators (SLAITO) in collaboration with the Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau (SLTPB), the exhibition was held on 15 and 16 th of May.

The exhibition brought together over 250 exhibitors and 300+ stalls with the participation of more than 100 international agents featuring in B2B meetings, panel discussions , and workshops designed to foster collaboration and knowledge-sharing.

This year’s exhibition welcomed foreign hosted buyers for the first time, creating unprecedented opportunities for local stakeholders to connect with international markets.

During the event, the Prime Minister officially opened the Exhibition Sancharaka Udawa 2026 for the public.

Addressing the occasion, the Prime Minister stated that the government’s vision is to build a sustainable, inclusive, and environmentally conscious tourism industry, while emphasizing the need for the sector to adapt to environmental, political, economic, and global challenges. The Prime Minister also highlighted the importance of positioning Sri Lanka competitively in the global tourism arena and strengthening the country’s international brand as a unique destination.

Highlighting the importance of developing human capital and capacity within the sector, the Prime Minister underscored the role of ongoing education reforms in preparing young people for future opportunities. The Prime Minister stated that reforms in education should enable young people to access multiple pathways and gain exposure to industries such as tourism. In this regard, closer collaboration between the tourism sector and educational institutions was identified as essential.

The Prime Minister also stressed the importance of strengthening domestic tourism and improving the overall tourism experience.

Emphasizing the future development of the sector, the Prime Minister noted that close partnership and collaboration between the government and the private sector are vital to achieving sustainable progress in the tourism industry.

The opening ceremony was attended by Prof. Ruwan Ranasinghe, Deputy Minister of Tourism, Prof. Anil Jayantha Fernando, Deputy Minister of Finance and Planning, Ms. Aruni Ranaraja, Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism, Nalin Jayasundera, President, SLAITO,  Buddhika Hewawasam, Chairman, SLTPB/SLTDA and representatives of Diplomatic core, agents and exhibitors.

Thriposha production hindered amid maize import delay and regulatory impasse

Prof. Venerable Maha Oya Jinarathana Nayaka Thero conferred the title of Chief Sanghanayaka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.