MR gets SLFP presidential ticket, Anura sidelined; Mangala attempts PM compromise

The Central Committee of the SLFP met in the President’s House on July 28, 2005 to select its nominee for the Presidential election to be held in December 2005. It was unanimously decided that the leader of the Opposition Mahinda Rajapaksa should be the SLFP’s, and by extension the PA’s, nominee. It was a bitter blow to CBK and especially Anura who had considered himself “primus inter pares” and the mentor of Mahinda ignoring the warnings of his mother and sisters. Even more galling was that Mangala Samaraweera, their favourite ring master, had become a staunch supporter of MR. He managed to wriggle out of this dilemma by proposing that Anura should become the Prime Minister when MR was elected President.

This was a face saving device which not many, except perhaps Anura, took seriously as our main task was to defeat the UNP candidate who was likely to be Ranil. As it turned out it was Mangala’s decision to manage MR’s campaign which was decisive in this battle. This was made clear when soon after this meeting we trooped across to Temple Trees to announce our decision to the media. Anura and Ratnasiri Wickremanayake were missing at this meeting in which Maithripala Sirisena, Nimal Siripala, Mangala, Kadirgamar and I occupied the head table and faced the press.

Since there was a long interval between the announcement and the election which was scheduled for December that year I continued with preparations for the 2006 Budget though the UNP voiced an objection saying that it should await the results of the Presidential election. Mangala was the chief negotiator for the MR camp and he came to us with various budgetary proposals to improve the chances of his candidate. The main demand was that we should further increase the subsidy on fertilizer which was then sold for Rs.500 a cwt. He wanted it reduced to Rs. 300 in the forthcoming Budget. All the studies by researchers showed that our farmers were overusing fertilizer or selling it at a profit to the commercial crop sector. It was not significantly increasing paddy yields while draining funds from the Treasury.

One of the difficulties with subsidies is the inability to get the price right. Over subsidizing leads to artificially inflated demand without a parallel increase in production. Therefore I was in two minds about increasing the subsidy. [This was proved right later when Gotabaya pledged that fertiliser will be given free. He later dampened the farmers hopes by banning chemical fertilizers and recommending the use of organic fertiliser. This was the beginning of the end of his tenure because the farmers violently resisted this “march of folly” and vowed to dismiss him and his Minister of Agriculture, Mahindananda Aluthgamage.

The JVP group left the CBK government after objecting to 1) PTOMS. They were against any deal with the LTTE, tsunami or no tsunami. We were particularly distressed to see the departure of the four JVP Ministers- AKD, Herath, Lalkantha and Wijesinghe, who had handled their portfolios with competence. AKD in particular was quite active in his Agriculture Ministry. I went out of my way to help him.

PB Jayasundara and I arranged for him to address the Chamber of Commerce. The hall was full to capacity and AKD outlined a strategy to revitalize the rural vector with the assistance of the business community. It was the lirst time in its long history that the Chamber was addressed in Sinhala. In order to make AKD comfortable I too spoke in Sinhala making a plea for private sector cooperation. The Treasury then revised the purchasing price of milk upwards for milk producers, particularly of the hill country, in order to support AKD’s attempt it increasing domestic milk production.

In my discussions with the JVP ministers I got the feeling that there was a group in their Central Committee who for ideological reasons did not want any truck with the PA. It was this group that later became the “Peratugamis” led by Kumar Gunaratnam. But with the likelihood of the contest for the Presidency to be one between Ranil Wickremesinghe and Mahinda Rajapaksa, the JVP decided to back the latter and took the lead in promoting Mahinda’s campaign.

There were several reasons for this since up to now there was not much love lost between the JVP and MR. Of all the PA leaders MR was the least enthusiastic about the earlier PA-JVP alliance. On the other hand Anura who expected to be nominated for the Presidency was close to the JVP and was an advocate of an alliance without conditions. But with the LTTE on the ascendant and Ranil advocating a negotiated settlement, including a temporary joinder of the North and East, the JVP took a decision to back MR to the hilt.

Mangala was the chief interlocutor on MR’s behalf and with his good relations with the JVP he was able to firm up that flank before he secretly began to lure the LTTE into sabotaging Ranil’s chances. All this was done in the background of CBK and Anura offering lukewarm support to their own candidate. CBK’s strategy was to hold a series of meetings at provincial level under her patronage supporting MR without actually appearing at meetings arranged by Mahinda’s campaign staff.

But Mahinda outwitted her by not depending on CBK’s meetings and organizing his own mammoth district meetings. By this time the JVP and Jatika Hela Urumaya had taken over his campaign and had mobilized the Sinhala Buddhist vote for MR. This was not difficult since MR himself had built up his “persona” as a Sinhala Buddhist nationalist from the deep south. Perhaps the LTTE strategists thought that with MR at the helm it would be easier to mobilize the sympathies of India and the Tamil diaspora which tended to oppose an extreme Sinhala Buddhist candidate.

While the two candidates were planning their campaigns I joined CBK on a visit to Washington to discuses Tsunami relief with the IMF and the World Bank. The other members of the delegation were Mano Tittawella, Rohini Nanayakkara, and a representative of the Central Bank. Peter Harrold joined the World Bank delegation. Our visit became a high profile one when Bill Clinton came over from the White House to attend this meeting. All this was probably interpreted by the Mahinda camp as a CBK delaying tactic which drew attention away from their campaign. But even in Washington her mind was on the series of meetings she was planning in order to draw attention to the SLFP’s “political heritage” and hold MR to following party policies that she had advocated for ten years as President.

Kandy and Nuwara Eliya districts are usually problematic for the PA. The multi ethnic character of these two districts tended to favour the UNP. Due to a pact with JRJ which led to the granting of citizenship to all estate Tamils and their children left out after population shifts under the Srima-Shastri accord, Thondaman and his party became camp followers of the UNP which tended to tilt the balance in favour of the “greens”.

Mahinda was acutely conscious of this gap in his electoral strategy and had developed a bond with Lakshman Kiriella and Monty Gopallawa who were to spearhead his campaign in the hill country. But Kiriella had crossed over to the UNP and Monty was out of politics. MR was not close to Anuruddha Ratwatte or Jayaratne. For him I happened to be the best bet and he sent word to me that if elected he would make me the Prime Minister. Since he had made the same offer to several others [Just as Premadasa did in his campaign] and the PAs official position was that we were to make Anura the PM, I did not respond to his offer. However I decided to support him to the maximum and moved over to Kandy to participate in the local campaign.

But this did not prevent our opponents from spreading a canard that I was contemplating joining the UNP and working for Ranil. Both MR and I gave interviews denying this rumour. On September 20 the Daily Mirror reported MR as saying “No dispute between Amunugama and me” and “The UNP has reached bankruptcy. False propaganda is used to sling mud on me to create a dispute between Sarath Amunugama and me. Minister Amunugama discussed matters with me before leaving the country.”

At all our meetings I asked my supporters to back MR and the SLFP. The Daily News of October 11 reports the following; “Vote for Mahinda says Amunugama”- “Dr. Sarath Amunugama called upon all Sri Lankans to rally round Minister Mahinda Rajapaksa to ensure his victory at the Presidential election in view of the threat to the country’s democracy that would be leveled by a UNP rule. He refuted speculation that he was planning to leave the SLFP and he would work against Rajapaksa’s candidature. “I have no reason to leave the SLFP or to work against Rajapaksa he said” .

The brunt of MR’s campaign was borne by Mangala and the JVP. There were daily early morning meetings with the JVP to coordinate our strategy. We had a mammoth meeting in Galagedera where PA speakers and JVP representative ViJitha Herath addressed the audience in the presence of Mahinda. Since I had been appointed the SLFP organizer for Galagedera, the former organizer Samarakoon had planned to disrupt the meeting. But he was foiled because of the large numbers that turned up. His tactics of spreading rumours of an impending cross over by me were exposed. Mahinda wanted me to join him in his ritualistic visit to Asgiriya and Malwatte where he received a good reception. He left for Colombo satisfied and telling his entourage that “With Sarath there we will have no problems in Kandy”.

Anura however continued to boycott MR’s meetings – a “lapse” that was highlighted by the media. “But Mr. Anura Bandaranaike, back home after a long absence…. was not present at the Wariyapola rally and one report said he had pleaded that his helicopter could not fly because of the weather. Bandaranaike still has visions of the Prime Ministry and he is on record saying that was the decision of the SLFP Central Committee that must be honoured. “But the candidate will obviously expect his running mate to show up at the campaign, not poke him in the ribs in sundry interviews and throw his literally considerable weight in winning the election if he wishes to partake of the subsequent plums” [Sunday Island 16 October 2005].

In the meanwhile we were getting ready to present the Budget for 2006. Th UNP was naturally perturbed about an “election budget” and wanted it postponed till the election was over. But we decided to go ahead because there was no precedent for postponing the next year’s Budget. Nor were we willing to forgo a good opportunity in the context of a tight contest. It was Mangala who was overlooking this aspect and also directing MR’s publicity campaign. At the same time he and his inner council were planning a sensational coup for election day which ultimately snatched victory away from Ranil and gave MR the Presidency by the narrowest of margins.

The theme of our Budget proposals was bridging the gap between the “haves” and “have nots”. At the same time I emphasized the need to coordinate state efforts with a dynamic private sector which was the path to improve on our 5.5 percent GDP growth which marked 2005. While delivering the Budget speech Mangala and MR sent notes across the table asking me to reduce the price of fertilizer from Rs. 500 a cwt to Rs. 300. It was not possible to oblige them because the figures of the budget would then have to be revised drastically. So I refused their request but “ad libbed” that I would review these prices during the course of the year if the economy grew as we anticipated.

That seemed to satisfy MR and Mangala because they praised the Budget. The previous year MR had called my Budget “the best since NM’s Budget” which appeared to be a double edged compliment since my effort, unlike NM’s, was to stimulate the private sector overlooking the usual leftist nostrums about socialism.

The Presidential election which was called on 7th September 7, 2005 was held on November 17 that year. 9,826,908 votes were cast and Mahinda Rajapaksa won by a narrow majority:

Rajapaksa barely cleared the 50 percent minimum which was necessary if this verdict was to be upheld. If not a run off would have resulted with Ranil winning on the second count. A statistical analysis of the results showed that there was a polarization between the votes cast for MR and those of RW on the basis of majority and minority ethnic groupings. While the Sinhala Buddhist electorates tended to give a majority to MR, electorates dominated by Muslims and estate Tamils as well as electorates which had a significant minority representation went to RW. The inevitable conclusion was that the majority of Sinhala voters did not approve of the “peace pact” assiduously sponsored by RW.

MR emerged as the representative of core Sinhala-Buddhist interests which had not been the case with CBK in 1994 and 1999. Since the LTTE had called for a boycott of the election many votes in the North and East which would have gone to Ranil were lost to him. Of the core Tamil electorates of Kilinochchi, Point Pedro and Chavakachcheri which polled 18 percent of the registered voters in the 1999 election, only 01 percent went to the polls in 2005 clearly indicating that the LTTE sponsored boycott was working.

It was common knowledge among political commentators, and later alleged by Ranil himself, that the MR camp had struck a deal with the LTTE to prevent Tamil voters from exercising their franchise. The “brokers” of the deal were reputed to be Mangala and his protege Tiran Alles. Both were greeted with hugs by M R when they came to Temple Trees to announce their victory Ironically their negotiations with the representatives of the LTTE were based on the financial estimates for development in the North and East which had been prepared for the implementation of P-TOMS.

Another irony was that several Colombo Tamil lawyers who claimed to have access to the LTTE had assured that the northern vote would be delivered to Ranil. “Thus till it was all over the UNP strategists were expecting the Tamils to vote “en masse” for their candidate. The boycott came as rude shock to them. Ranil had lost both the hard core Sinhala Buddhist vote as well as the pro LTTE Tamil vote thereby snatching defeat again from the jaws of victory.

With the formal announcement of MR’s victory by the Elections Commissioner attention was shifted to Cabinet making. A few days after the announcement CBK called for a meeting in President’s House. We all assembled for dinner and the talk turned to the hostility between the newly elected President and his predecessor. I took MR to CBK’s circle and asked her to give him her blessings since we all wanted a SLFP victory which MR had delivered. CBK was quite cold to that idea and we left without much success.

All attention was focused on the Premiership. It was clear that MR’s advisors had decided that Anura should not be given that post as he had not pulled his weight during the election campaign. In fact he had not even attended the dinner party organized by CBK to felicitate the President elect. We were wondering whether Mangala would be able to convince MR to forgive and forget. On the way out after dinner Mangala asked me what portfolio I would like. I replied that my preference was for the Tourism Ministry since I had dealt with the subject as a public servant.

Early the following morning I got a call to see MR in Temple Trees. I went upstairs to find the President and Amarasiri Dodangoda in earnest conversation. He told me that he was appointing me the Minister of Public Administration and Home Affairs which was then held by Dodangoda. He told Dodan that since he was not in the best of health he would be made Minister of Justice so that he could take it easy – a diagnosis which was not to Dodan’s liking since he soon began sulking.

Later in the day the new Cabinet was sworn in with Ratnasiri Wickremanayake as Prime Minister. Mangala told me that Anura was to be the Minister of Public Administration and I, as requested by me the night before, was to become the Minister for Tourism. But Anura had come late at night to Temple Trees and asked for the Tourism portfolio as he wanted to travel overseas. Thus our portfolios were switched and the more senior position was fortuitously assigned to me. The new President retained the portfolio of Finance with PB Jayasundera as his Secretary.

I was happy to be assigned the portfolio of Public Administration as I had served there as a senior Assistant Secretary under Felix Bandaranaike. In fact a few months earlier I had delivered the Felix Bandaranaike memorial oration at the request of Mrs. Lakshmi Bandaranaike and my former boss Baku Mahadeva. It was a senior position in the Cabinet which was once held by Ratnasiri Wickremanayake before he became Prime Minister. The JVP and JHU which played an important role in the election opted not to accept portfolios but they were cultivated by the new President who could always sense trouble before it erupted.

This JVP combine had over 30 members of Parliament who could determine the fate of the MR government. Their main reason to remain in the government group was to ensure that there would be no attempt to end the war through negotiations.

Sri Lanka to Host Landmark World Congress on Snakes in Kandy

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.