Lest we forget – 2

In 1944 Juan José Arévalo was democratically elected President of Guatemala. At the time a Boston-based banana company in Guatemala, called the United Fruit Company (UFC), had established and was running the country’s harbour, railways and electricity, to facilitate UFC’s fruit export business. It was a ‘state within a state’. The UFC received many concessions, yet corruption was rampant and local workers got a mere pittance as wages ($90 per year). Some 70% of the citizens, mostly of Mayan Indian origin, worked for 3% of the landowners who owned in excess of 550,000 acres. In fact, more than half of government employees were in the payroll of UFC. Needless to say, life under those tyrannical conditions was tough for ordinary Guatemalans who were illiterate and owed their souls to the UFC.

Those were the days of the ‘Cold War’, when a Communist was supposedly seen behind every bush – or a ‘Red under the bed’ – by US Senator Joseph McCarthy and all anti-Communists. A few years later, teachers in Guatemala, and other workers in general, demanded higher wages and were involved in strikes.

In 1951 there was another democratic election, and Jacobo Árbenz was appointed President with a promise to make the lives of Guatemala’s three million citizens better. He implemented a land reform act (No. 900) which forced UFC to sell back undeveloped land to the government, who in turn distributed it to the poor folk for farming sugar, coffee and bananas. It had been UFC’s practice not to develop all the land they owned, keeping some of it on ‘standby’ in case of hurricanes or plant disease. In fact, UFC had utilised only 15% of the land they owned. The new Guatemalan President himself contributed a sizable amount of his own land to the new scheme, while compensation paid to UFC, based on declared land value in the company’s own tax declarations, amounted to US$1.2 million.

However, it was USA’s Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles (after whom Dulles International Airport in Washington, DC is named), not UFC, who sent a letter to the Guatemalan government demanding the enormous sum of US$16 million in reparations. John Dulles and his brother, Allen W. Dulles, then head of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), had worked together as partners of the law firm Sullivan & Cromwell – which, not coincidentally, represented UFC. Allen Dulles was also a shareholder and board member of UFC.

The Dulles brothers were staunch Calvinists by religious denomination, and to them everything had to be ‘black or white’. At a secret meeting with the UFC board the two brothers were sold a lie saying that President Árbenz was a Communist, which was in turn conveyed to US President Dwight Eisenhower, who allocated money for covert operations to be conducted in Guatemala. Correspondents of The New York Times and Time magazine, sent to Guatemala and paid for by the UFC, began fabricating stories, known today as ‘fake news’, which were duly published by those respected and widely read publications.

One day in Washington, DC, Allen Dulles met Kermit Roosevelt – son of the late US President Theodore Roosevelt – who was in the process of engineering an Iranian regime change, and Dulles offered Roosevelt the opportunity to do something similar in Guatemala. But Roosevelt refused, claiming that there were too many loose ends to contend with. Subsequently, John E. Peurifoy was appointed as US Ambassador to Guatemala to direct operations from within.

The first attempt to undermine the Guatemalan government, code-named ‘Operation PBFORTUNE’, failed due to information leaks. A second attempt, dubbed ‘PBSUCCESS’, was launched later. Using a CIA-established radio station in Miami, Florida, called ‘The Voice of Liberation’ and pretending to be a rebel radio station inside Guatemala, the incumbent President Árbenz was accused of being a Communist. But in reality he was not a Communist, and did not have a single member of the Communist Party in his government. All he had done was to legalise the Communist Party in Guatemala, saying that they were all citizens of the country and democracy demanded it. Yet disinformation was spread liberally by the CIA, by means of fake radio broadcasts and aerial leaflet drops from unmarked American airplanes flown by foreign pilots. The same aircraft were then used to bomb Guatemala.

These American antics were observed by a young Argentinian doctor who happened to be in Guatemala at the time. His name was Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara, who despite his anti-imperialist revolutionary fervour, chose not to become involved. Later, however, ‘Che’ went to Mexico where he joined the Cuban Castro brothers, Fidel and Raul, in their ultimately successful revolution which culminated in the dethroning of Cuba’s pro-US President Fulgencio Batista, and establishment of a Communist government in the Caribbean’s largest island.

Meanwhile in Guatemala, demoralised by the flood of fake news, in 1954 President Jacobo Árbenz stepped down from office and sought refuge in the Mexican Embassy. He was replaced as President by a US-backed, exiled military man, Carlos Castillo Armas, who was described as “bold but incompetent”.

Guatemalan citizens loyal to the old regime were eliminated according to hit lists prepared by the CIA. Unmarked vans kidnapped people who were tortured and burnt to death. Ultimately, land was given back to the UFC.

It was a rule by terror that lasted for nearly 40 years, during which an estimated 200,000 people died. According to The Guardian, thousands of now declassified documents tell how the US initiated and sustained a murderous war conducted by Guatemalan security forces against civilians suspected of aiding left wing guerrilla movements, with the USA responsible for most of the human rights abuses.

This, I believe, became a template for destabilising and inducing regime change by the USA in other countries.

In the words of former US President Bill Clinton in 1999: “It is important that I state clearly that support for military forces or intelligence units which engaged in violent and widespread repression of the kind described in reports was wrong, and the United States must not repeat that mistake. We must and we will instead continue to support the peace and reconciliation process in Guatemala.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.