Working with Anura B and returning to Education Ministry

Before, I leave this chapter, I thought it would be appropriate to say something about the Minister and the Deputy Minister. I am encouraged to do this because they were some of the nicest persons anyone could work with. The Minister, Mr. Anura Bandaranaike, had great liberal instincts. A conversation with him never descended to the sordid or petty. He was very well read and principally interested in issues. He also had a lively sense of humour and a satirical eye for human foibles, which periodically resulted in a booming laugh which was heard much beyond his room.

He was broad and generous in his approach to anything and soon began to hate the interminable nit picking of trade unions. After spending much time and effort in discussions with them, one day he decided he had had enough. “Dharmasiri, you handle them. I am not going to talk to them,” he blurted out in considerable irritation. I promised I would do so and advise him if I thought that his meeting them would be absolutely necessary.

Mr. Bandaranaike dealt with policies and issues. Details bored him. He shunned micro management. He was so nice to me that most of the time he refrained from addressing me as “Secretary.” Even on official files and documents his minute would start with “My dear Dharmasiri.” One day, when I pointed this out, he merely laughed, but continued. It was a pleasure to work with him, as well as his personal staff such as his Private Secretary, the Co-ordinating Secretary and others. They were all gentlemen.

The Deputy Minister was Mr. Tissa Attanayake, a Member of Parliament from the Kandy district. He was young, had a good personality and was a graduate of the University of Kelaniya. At my first meeting with him, I realized that he possessed great potential. He was well balanced and mature, and what was rare for a Sri Lankan, and particularly for a politician, had the ability to listen carefully and talk sparingly. During a very troublous period, he was of great assistance to his Minister. He realized and appreciated the pressure I was under and went out of his way to relieve me whenever possible. He handled political issues with skill and patience and never shirked work or responsibility. We need young politicians of his calibre irrespective of which parties they belong to.

After the elections, Cabinet formation and the selection of Secretaries took awhile. In the meantime I instructed my officers to attend to routine matters, not to sign anything of a statutory nature, because the existing Ministries were now dissolved. With the dissolution I was no longer a Secretary. I said that I would be remaining at home until the new government decided what to do with me, but that of course I would be available for any consultation or advice.

Matters were at this when Mrs. Srimani Athulathmudali phoned. She had contested the elections in the Colombo district with her husband Lalith’s old seat of Ratmalana as the base. She had done quite well polling over 100,000 votes. Mrs. Athulathmudali said that she was likely to get the Ministry of Transport, Highways and Women’s Affairs, with Environment perhaps added and she invited me to become the Secretary to the new Ministry. She said that she would appreciate my guidance and went on to say “Lalith had a very high regard for you.” I knew that the “transport” part of the Ministry was going to be quite troublesome. As a Ministry it would not have been a priority choice as far as I was concerned. But I could not decline due to the excellent relations of mutual respect and trust that Mr. Athulathmudali and I had developed working in two difficult Ministries, as well as knowing Mrs. Athulathmudali. I therefore accepted but reminded her that she should first clear this with the new Prime Minister.

She said she would. A day later I was informed that the Prime Minister had approved and I was invited to her home at Flower Terrace on the afternoon of August 21 in order to discuss arrangements in relation to the Ministry. We had almost a two hour discussion. I found Mrs. Athulathmudali to be calm and incisive in her thinking. She seemed to posses the temperament necessary for a Ministry such as Transport. It was an advantage to have a Minister who would not be easily flustered.

That same night Mr. Richard Pathirana rang. He said, “You must come to Education. This is a very important Ministry and there’s a lot of work to be done.” This was quite unexpected and I was very surprised. I did not want to go back to the now reconstituted Ministry of Education and Higher Education. I had several reasons. Firstly, I had already served in the combined Ministry as well as the separate Ministry of Higher Education for a total period of over four years. Secondly, I did not really know Mr. Pathirana. I had only come across him a few times in the Parliamentary Consultative Committee on education where he functioned as the Chief Opposition spokesman on Education. He had also telephoned me a few times on some official matter. That was all.

One could also see that he had his own unique style of speaking and a bit of a temper. I was not sure how I would interact with him. But thirdly, and most importantly, and as I have already related, the officials of the Ministry and the other agencies under the Ministry had given me such an emotional send-off when I left for Public Administration that I felt it impossible to return to the same place. It was a send-off of no return! I therefore told Mr. Pathirana that I wouldn’t like to come back and explained why.

He had made up his mind and was not prepared to take “No” for an answer. He said that I should not be too sensitive about the send-off. “In any case everyone will know that it was I who called you back,” he said. My successor Mr. Weragoda, an experienced administrator was the Secretary at this time. So I told Mr. Pathirana that he already has a good Secretary and that I would not wish to displace him. He was not to be denied. “Don’t worry about Mr. Weragoda. We will find a place for him. I want you to come,” he replied. There was no point in taking matters any further.

“It’s up to the Prime Minister and you,” I said. He thanked me and said that he will get back. I did not mention about Mrs. Athulathmudali to him, because that would have been an unnecessary complication. As in the case of some previous occasions where I was involved the matter had to be now sorted out by the two Ministers with the Prime Minister.

When I informed Mrs. Athulathmudali about this latest and unexpected development, she was gravely disappointed. But she herself felt that she couldn’t fight a person of Mr. Pathirana’s seniority and standing in the party, on this issue. On the morning of August 23, a combined official farewell function for the outgoing Minister of Higher Education, Mr. Anura Bandaranaike, and a welcoming function for the new Minister of Education and Higher Education, Mr. Richard Pathirana, had been organized in the auditorium of the UGC. Some one telephoned me at home and invited me to be present. I had still not received my letter of appointment.

I therefore informed the caller that I would only participate in anything of an official nature if and when I was formally appointed. I had no status, and I thanked him and declined the offer. Mr. Pathirana was then kind enough to phone me personally and invite me to the function as his guest. It was a nice function with both Mr. Bandaranaike and Mr. Pathirana making good speeches. Mr. Pathirana publicly stated that he was glad that he was able to persuade me to return to the Ministry. The whole proceedings were encouraging because they were so amicable and civilized. When the function was over I accompanied Mr. Bandaranaike to his car. On the way he said, “Amma will become Prime Minister after the Presidential Elections and she will want you back.” I just smiled. It would have been a delight to work with her again. But what struck me most was her manner of thinking. Mrs. Bandaranaike was already in the Cabinet as Minister without Portfolio. She could have asked for me, since she was entitled to a Secretary. But she was not prepared to do that.

Knowing her, I am certain that she thought about me, and not of herself. Given my record and my seniority she would not have wanted me to be a Secretary to a Minister without Portfolio, even if that Minister was herself. She was going to wait until she became Prime Minister, so that I would then be Secretary to the Prime Minister. That this was precisely what she had in her mind was borne out by later events which I will record in the appropriate place.

In the meantime, I informed Mr. Pathirana, that I was going home since I did not wish to come to office and function, and sign official documents without receiving a letter of appointment. He agreed and said that he would get the Presidential Secretariat to expedite my letter. During the intervening period, I was encouraged by several telephone calls I received from some of my former colleagues in education welcoming me back.

(Excerpted from The Art of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.