Song, dance and protests at World Cup

The 2026 World Cup began in Mexico City with an opening ceremony filled with colour, dancing and a performance by global music star Shakira.

Thousands of fans arrived at the legendary Azteca stadium in Mexico City with a real sense of excitement for the first World Cup on their home turf in 40 years.

For the most part, though, football took centre stage and there were wild celebrations as Mexico kicked off their campaign with a 2-0 win over South Africa.

Mexican officials said that nearly 200 hooded individuals broke away from two groups of around 800 protesters and clashed with law enforcement, but the situation “was brought under control” by police.

Meanwhile, teachers and families of those who have gone missing in Mexico’s drug war marched in various protests, to highlight their causes while the country is in the global spotlight.

Mexico is co-hosting the 2026 tournament alongside the US and Canada, with those teams hosting their own opening ceremonies on Friday.

Ahead of the match, fans in the stadium were treated to performances from Shakira, Colombia’s J Balvin, Afrobeats star Burna Boy and Latin music star Danny Ocean.

Mexican singer-songwriter Fher Olvera of the pop punk band Maná took the stage to sing the classic Oye Mi Amor.

Bienvenida a México. Welcome to Mexico,” a performer announced to start the tournament.

“We are a nation of diversity, heritage and pride. Football carries the same heartbeat, uniting generations.”

Performers wore indigenous clothing, while others were dressed in all gold and held giant golden footballs above their heads.

A packed stadium of fans dressed in their own colourful outfits, many wearing Mexico’s team colours.

Opera superstar Andrea Bocelli and K-Pop singer Ejae performed the tournament’s official anthem DNA, which was officially released on Wednesday.

Mexican singer Alejandro Fernández, who is the son of veteran crooner Vicente Fernández, sang the Mexican national anthem in unison with many of the 80,000 fans.

Tyla, whose hits include the song Water and the Fifa song Game Time, will return to the World Cup stage on Friday to take part in the US opening ceremony in Los Angeles alongside Katy Perry, Future, Lisa and Anitta.

Fifa has tapped a bevy of global artists for the ceremonies, several of whom are featured on the 18-song Official Fifa World Cup 2026 Album.

What Do Sri Lankan Fans Think? Ranking the Top Contenders for the FIFA World Cup 2026

FIFA World Cup 2026: 10 Best Group Stage Matches to Watch in Sri Lanka