Pioneer of Sri Lankan Abstract Art

It is wilth great joy that I delve into my memories of the inimitable art teacher H A Karunatne. He was of course a teacher in the country’s formal education system and yet I am compelled to describe him as one who went beyond his professional calling to guide countless students, especially given my personal interactions with him. My compulsion is also driven by what I’ve heard what his formal students have said about him. He stood beyond the perimeters of the countless formal and traditional teachers we encountered. He stood apart, in this and other ways.

I consider it an honour to have known H A Karunaratne, a man with an advanced, balanced, calm, strong and brave intellect. The first meeting was quite by chance. Higher education was an unrealized dream for me due to a technical glitch that was necessary for institutional continuity, to put it mildly. I nevertheless got an opportunity to attend a non-traditional university, the Divaina of Upali Newspapers and its Sunday edition, Divaina Irida Sangrahaya. This was in the year 1981.

I was hired as the editorial artist but I always wanted to explore regions that were outside the ambit of an artist’s role in print media. I expressed this desire and following discussions on the matter, the Editor-in-Chief Edmund Ranasinghe, Deputy Editor Dayasena Gunasinghe, and the then Managing Director Leslie Dharmaratne agreed to support me and as importantly accorded me the necessary freedom.

These three gentlemen helped me create for myself the time and space needed to develop my skills and to meet those whose counsel and guidance I felt was necessary. I learnt academic art from Stanley Abeysinghe, the former principal of the Government College of Fine Arts. Some of my ‘artistic’ friends at the time were students at the College. Among them were Kingsley Gunatilleka, Chandraguptha Theruwara, Jagath Weerasinghe, Monty Senarath Colambage, Karunasiri Wijesinghe, Athula Mendis and Somaratne Silva who are critically acclaimed artists today.

The ‘Divaina,’ launched in 1981 revolutionized newspaper art in Sri Lanka. There grew within the general idea of designing an expansive art form. Whereas illustration was generally taken to be a filler of space on a page or, put another way, an insertion that complemented text, ‘art’ came to do more, i.e. to decorate text but also communicate something more. Among the handful of people who helped ‘engineer’ this transformation was H A Karunaratne.

One day Athula Mendis came to me with an interesting piece of information.

‘Machang, you have been learning from Stanley Abeysinghe Sir. There’s another great teacher who seems to have noticed you.’

‘Something interesting happened today in College. While reading the Divaina paper, he said that there were some really great illustrations in the paper. He said they were different and added that the illustrator cannot be anyone from our college! Now a door has opened. Go see him and see if he would agree to take you on as a student.’

This is how it began. I went to see ‘H A Sir’ at his place on Nalandarama Road in Nugegoda. There was a large white wall and a small black door. I knocked. The door opened. A man with a large towel around his waist opened the door. He was tending to a garden with what looked like a thicket of many small trees and a small pond with fish.

‘Ah….are you the one who draws strange kinds of illustrations for the Divaina? Go inside. You can sit. Let me put on a shirt.’

No one would have thought that this meeting would be the beginning of a unique and fascinating teacher-student relationship.

It can’t be said that he enjoyed any special popularity from traditional students as a traditional teacher. He was nevertheless highly respected by everyone for his unique personality and as someone whose efforts were governed by a specific objective. I believe that if I acquired any knowledge across a vast spectrum it is because I was fortunate to associate with non-traditional teachers such as H A Karunaratne and others such as Stanley Abeysinghe and Bandula Peiris.

H A Karunaratne’s work can be described as being creative, colourful, seemingly specific and even rigid, and yet soft and layered with subtext. In his early work one can see the basic features of the art of that time, but also a certain movement abstracted from it all. This is perhaps why he is referred to as the pioneer of abstract art in Sri Lanka.

Nevertheless I was quite taken up by his efforts to venture into even more unique areas by techniques such as burning the canvas, use of thread, nails, pieces of metal in the 1990s. He thus stamped himself as the pioneer of contemporary art as well. It is clear that his quiet and solitary efforts generated quite an extraordinary corpus of work. He was not one to stay still in one place like a pond, but moved like a tremendous and deep body of water that challenged the world around him. This itself was quite colourful.

It is no secret that for many were puzzled by H A Karunaratne’s art. It came with question marks. It generated questions that went unanswered. As for the artist, he was not interested in answering questions. But he did observe the following:

‘The connoisseur needs to make an effort and have the necessary interest in order to appreciate a work of art. There should be space and opportunity for anyone to appreciate art in accordance with his or her knowledge and understanding. It is unlikely that everyone could read any of this in the very same way.’

The electronic and print media, audio-visual media, the university community, personal social activities, state institutions, infrastructure to take art to the people etc., need to be carefully developed. This is a prerequisite to develop a fraternal connection between art and the people. The distance that exists now would then be less. The much vaunted ‘cultural man’ or ‘cultural persona’ has a better chance of being created. We have failed thus far in this endeavour.

It is for this reason that some declare that they do not understand H A Karunaratne’s work. They offer as an excuse the fact that they have not obtained any formal education on the relevant subject. Armed with such an excuse they do even try to appreciate art. It’s the same in the universities and in society in general. And yet, based on whatever knowledge they may have acquired on some other unrelated, subject, they take decisions on the administering of subtle art forms they are clueless about. Therefore it is important to discuss why artists like H A Karunaratne worked in isolation.

There are of course some who mimicked him and even claimed that they too could produce similar work. That they floundered is quite apparent when their work is examined.

So, in this context, one could ask if even his formal students truly understood his teaching techniques. He would penetrate the creation at some point and through it delve into the canvas. The experience obtained in this journey would give him the strength to clear the pathways ahead. This is not easy to understand. It is hard to travel along that path. It is in fact an arduous path.

Now, when reflecting on H A Karunaratne’s artistic journey, I find myself asking whether it is dissimilar to the Buddha taking Prince Nanda from a newly cleared chena to the heavens. He seems to have comprehended something from what he saw, what he experienced. He transformed his philosophy of life and his life itself according to knowledge acquired. As did Prince Nanda. His teaching methodology is quite close to that which is evidenced by the Buddhist parable above. To put it in a nutshell, the Buddha didn’t show Sopaka the path he showed Prince Nanda.

Buddhist literature recognizes that people are endowed with different kinds and levels of knowledge. It is based on what one knows that one reads the dhamma or any particular subject. The wise teacher offers instruction and offers it in a manner that the student before him can digest. The foundation of H A Karunaratne’s creative world is Buddhist philosophy.

H A Karunaratne was a man of simple ways. He was so soft spoken that it was not easy for someone who sat close to him to hear what he was saying. This is known by everyone who associated with him closely. I have observed on many occasions how he would smile and avoid intense debate. He would even smile if someone ridiculed or poked fun at him. He would offer a short and simple response and that was it. This is not because he couldn’t refute the argument expressed. I know for certain that he had the knowledge, strength and ability to destroy the arguments offered by someone he disagreed with. Such strength, however, he reserved for his creative work.

He was composed. The discipline developed through exercise served as a filter for his energy and strength which, thereafter, he could pour into the creative exercise. This seems to be what many in Sri Lanka cannot understand. It is the congealed energy filtered from a unique and unforgiving regimen that we find in his creative work.

It is not that his subjects were out of this world. No, they are elements of the everyday that inspire popular art. And yet, he had the courage to present them in unique ways. His work speaks, but he never seemed to be constrained by how it would be read or indeed whether it would be understood at all. In fact he was well aware that countless people would not understand or that they would not appreciate him. For him what was important was to share with everyone whatever knowledge he had painstakingly acquired. The courage evident in his work is one of the most amazing things I’ve experienced.

H A Karunaratne, having studied under the great teachers at the Government College of Fine Arts obtained a scholarship to further study his craft overseas. Later he served as a senior lecturer at the Aesthetic University. More important than any of this is his life as an artist. From what I know, he was quite industrious. And he embraced a wide spectrum of forms. He studied and while studying ventured into graphic art, print, sculpture and pure art even as he was the pioneer of aforementioned abstract and contemporary art.

Once I helped him set up a large painting on a wall of the Rupavahini Corporation lobby. He found a broom from somewhere and started sweeping the tiled floor. It was done. He stepped back a bit and gazed upon the painting for a moment. Then he came towards me.

‘Shantha, someone might come after we’ve gone and thinking it is incomplete may proceed to “finish it” don’t you think?’

For art to be appreciated people should be able to associate with it closely, so to speak. There are certain preconditions for this to happen. There should be good art galleries. Good art should be exhibited. There should be discussions and debates about art and new trends in art. There should be good art critics. These are not conditions that artists can create. H A Karunaratne did what he could to the best of his ability and strength. He did his duty.

Now it is our turn. Shouldn’t there be more art galleries so that the distance between art and the people contracts? The National Art Gallery has been shut down for the last 15 years. Had this not been the case our people would have had the opportunity to see the work of artists such as H A Karunaratne as well as renowned artists from other countries. These are issues that need to be addressed. These are questions that need to be asked.

These are questions that may have troubled the great artist and art teacher H A Karunaratne. He never asked such questions. He is no more. And yet, the colours he obtained from the world around him will continue to fill our minds. We can but enjoy.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.