BASL writes to President raising concerns over challenges faced by RTI Commission

Says any proposed amendment to RTI Act or functioning of Commission must be preceded by due consultations including with BASL, as a principal stakeholder, and public

The Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) has written to President Anura Kumara Dissanayake over the challenges faced by the Right to Information (RTI) Commission following the latter’s statement issued on 20 November.

The RTI Commission, established under the Right to Information Act, No. 12 of 2016, plays a vital role in safeguarding the Constitutional right of citizens to access information under Article 14A of the Constitution. Its independent functioning and accountability are therefore of paramount importance. Under Section 12(1)(a) of the Act, the BASL nominates a member to the Commission, making the Association a principal stakeholder in its operations. It is to be noted that with the limited resources, the Commission has rendered commendable service during the past decade since its establishment.

As a key stakeholder, the BASL said it is deeply concerned about the challenges currently faced by the Commission, particularly issues of serious understaffing and inadequate financing.

“These deficiencies directly undermine the Commission’s ability to function independently and effectively. Therefore, we respectfully urge Your Excellency to take immediate steps to ensure the provision of adequate and independent financial resources to the Commission, thereby safeguarding its autonomy and capacity to discharge its mandate,” it said.

Furthermore, the BASL said it strongly opposes amendment to the RTI Act that would curtail citizens’ right to information guaranteed under Article 14A of the Constitution.

“We emphasise that any proposed amendment to the Act or to the functioning of the Commission must be preceded by due consultations including with the BASL, as a principal stakeholder, and with the general public. We trust that Your Excellency will give due consideration to these concerns in the interest of upholding the Constitutional rights of the people and ensuring the continued independence of the RTI Commission,” the BASL said in its letter to President Dissanayake.