‘From nose to Tale’

Strolling down memory lane is always a pleasant pastime, especially if the contents are of the pleasing kind. I have known Capt. Gihan A Fernando (fondly known as GAF) from the first time I climbed into a small aeroplane. We both were student pilots at the Department of Civil Aviation-owned Ratmalana Flying School. We took our initial lessons to become commercial pilots in make-shift classrooms where the teaching was done on a black-board, and the writing was with chalk. I distinctly recall GAF in his ‘jungle khaki’ trousers walking the shadeless kilometre from the Galle Road to the Flying School. We all did it most mornings, and, occasionally, with luck, we did get a lift from a passing vehicle. Many days we arrived at the school at first light and hung around past noon and went back without even touching an aeroplane. That was almost a norm, we came, and we saw but we couldn’t conquer. Yes, the Mitsuo Fuchida and the Baron von Richthofens of Ratmalana did struggle in a perpetual Calvary in our Katta Kaapu quest to qualify as pilots.

That was more than 55 years ago. From our initial fledgling days, we meandered in the aeroplane world taking measured steps in our crawl to become Airline Captains. The last time I sat in a cockpit with GAF was flying from Singapore to Melbourne and back on a SIA 747, maybe 20 years ago.

That sky tramping was a big slice of our lives, and we are still loitering around and talking about aviation and reminiscing on the ‘petals and pellets’ that fell on our heads which certainly converted to beautiful memories filled with nostalgia.

I am so glad GAF wrote ‘From Nose to Tale’. Now the stories we flew and lived are minted in print. Such will drift locally with monsoon winds or get blown intercontinentally by jet-streams and reach the far-spread fraternity of aviators who loved the sky. Thank you, GAF, and congratulations on what you created. It certainly is a remarkable read and a must to all and sundry who have been associated with aviation in Sri Lanka.

The book has an excellent beginning. It starts with a dedication to Capt. Chira Fernando, GAF’s brother. Story telling when compiled in book form should be dedicated with meaning. There could not be a better name than Chira to stare at us from the opening page with his four-striped gold braids giving him his richly deserved credibility.

The rest of the book is all about aviation. The aeroplanes depicted in decades old photographs are a treat to anyone interested in aircraft, especially the ancient fly-birds like the Tiger Moth. There is one flown by Capt Rohan Wijesinghe which may have been captured by a Jurassic Kodak. That plane may have been built by De Havilland in the 1930s. Perhaps, this old pelican of an aeroplane first came out of the hangars at a time when Wilbur and Orville were playing golf in retirement. Many other light aeroplanes pop out as you turn the pages. De Havilland Canadian Chipmunk, the Auster Autocrat, Indian made HAL Pushpak and a De Havilland Dove used by the Air Force. Today these are museum showpieces retaining their heredity for younger generations to gaze and admire. Yet, sadly, some of these ‘once treasured discards’ are scattered in the very places they flew, bashed and broken and withered and rusted, without a semblance of a sight how magnificent they had been. At least Gaffy and his  ‘From Nose to Tale’ has given a new lease in life to these graveyard skeletons which trigger remembrances instead of oblivion. Of course, the commercial giants GAF flew are there, too, the Lockheed Tristar, the Airbus 320, 340 and then the Queen of the sky the Boeing 747 making a low turn at the Checker Board at old Kai Tak airport in Hong Kong. GAF also flew the Avro 748, Boeing 707 and the pocket rocket, the Air Lanka 737.

Almost all stories written here carry names. Space and word count does not permit me to include the whole lot. Let me throw you a gist of what to expect. Airforce pilot Zac Dole doing five loops in continuation in his Chipmunk over the airfield in China Bay is nice to read. GAF was a volunteer pilot who watched from the ground and counted how Zac Dole flew his aerobatic act.

Another story of memory value is how GAF flew with Athula on a clear day to see Adam’s Peak’s summit splashed in an azure-blue sky. On returning he talks about Birdie Num Num who was a student from India who had come to Ratmalana to learn to fly. Add more spice to storytelling when you read Capt. Senthoor Selvan (then a student pilot) edged out from flying from Ratmalana to Jaffna on a cross-country flight with GAF. Then there is one about how GAF went as a passenger in a two-seater Pushpak with a fellow student. They were flying to Ratnapura and somewhere midway they lost power in the engine and managed to crawl to Katukurunda and land at the old runway built by Italian prisoners of war.

The GAF stories are great. I read about the times we were penniless student pilots dreaming of finding a way to be in the yonder blue. It was mostly a pot-hole filled path we limped on miserly adding hour by hour into our logbooks to reach the magical one hundred and fifty hours which qualified us to apply for a Commercial Pilot’s licence. That was the first step. GAF has traced the road-map we travelled and given us ‘From Nose to Tale’ to read and re-live our salt and salad days that made us who we are. Many who studied with us at Ratmalana did not make it to the commercial flying status. That is sad as the majority of them were more than capable of qualifying to fly big jets. Yet to some opportunities often faded as the years rolled and dreams converted to regrettable realities of accepted defeat. A few of us made it to where we intended to go. GAF was one and so was I. Maybe it was providence, maybe a little luck, too, or a mixture of both. These stories are all wrapped in ‘From Nose to Tale’ for the old pilots like us to read and remember and for the new generations to know what it was all about. We also should not fail to recall those who flew with us and faced the terrible tragedy of losing their lives in aeroplane accidents. That part was very sad. Such details are not easy to write as there are so many loved ones they left grieving on the ground when the sky took its toll and terminated their lives. However, story No. 32, ‘A silent prayer at 37,000 ft’ brings to the narration people of aviation who are not with us anymore. It sure is a remarkable tribute paid to stalwarts connected to the aeroplane world. The writing there is meaningful and valuable to those who had departed kith and kin who belonged to the sky clan.

Aviation stories are not ‘dime a dozen’. Sky saga connected to our own geographical location and our own lives are almost non-existent. Then comes Capt. Gihan Fernando who makes a collection of aviation stories that are based in our backyard. I am well aware that author GAF is no ‘Jonathan Livingstone,’ Richard Bach or a ‘High and the Mighty’ Ernest K Gann. He is simply our ‘jungle khaki’ Gaffy, Borella-bred, Thomian-rooted who had his humble beginnings flying from Ratmalana and stayed in the sky for more than five decades.

All we need is to pick a copy and cheer him for his wonderful and worthy contribution to Sri Lanka’s aviation.

Mannar Island communities face ecological disaster from Wind Power projects

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.