Athulathmudali – Premadasa tensions escalate and Lalith resigns

Dealing with Ministers, even good Ministers is not trouble free. Issues sometimes get confounded due to the differences in the points of departure and overall outlook between Ministers and civil servants. Ministers are prone to the temptation of short term advantage, sometimes to the negation of long term credibility. Civil servants, on the other hand have been long in the system and developed important networks over the years with their colleagues.

The most important currency in transactions within this network was your personal standing and credibility. To the extent you had this, official interpersonal relations with your colleagues were quicker, more productive and pleasant. When you approached them on some important issue they did not question your bona fides or except in extremely rare instances, your judgement. Your track record spoke for itself.

In my own case, I have already related, how the then Secretary to the Treasury Mr. Chandi Chanmugam authorized the release of Rs. 300 million, just across the table when I described to him the necessity to rehabilitate the multi-purpose co-operative societies. I was then the Secretary to the Ministry of Food and Co-operatives. This was however only one instance within my experience. There were many others. I therefore regarded my credibility as my most valued asset and was very sensitive to even a remote possibility of it being tarnished.

It was in this context that I found the Minister’s (Mr. Athulathmudali’s) application for funds to the Treasury on some occasions somewhat embarrassing. When I talked to him about it, I found that he was doing so to please certain Trade Unions and other constituencies who were demanding certain benefits. Some of these applications were direct, by-passing the system. Officials in the Treasury began to ask me what was happening. I spoke to the Minister of the importance of maintaining Our credibility with theTreasury.

I pointed out that if this went on, we would find it difficult even to get important applications through. From the Minister’s point of view, he didn’t want to be seen to be saying no to some of these requests. If the Treasury turned down his recommendations, he himself was off the hook. Then it was not his fault. He could say that he recommended, but the Treasury turned it down. I urged serious reconsideration of this policy. The Treasury was getting to a point that they could not figure out what was serious and what was not.

The Minister listened to my advice, but merely said “We’ll see!” Things improved for a while thereafter and then again it started. Not long afterwards a file came down to me with another unorthodox request to be sent to the Treasury. This time I felt it important to state my position in plain language. Obviously I could not do so on the file which was a public document which would be seen by many. I therefore tore off a piece of paper from my note pad and wrote out a note to the Minister.

In it I recalled our previous conversations; emphasized the damage that was being caused; stated that at least my credibility was very important to me; and warned that if this went on it would be difficult for me to continue in the Ministry. I then sealed this in two envelopes, personally addressed it to him, wrote “strictly personal” on the cover, stapled it to the cover of the file and saw that it was hand delivered to him.

Days passed. I carried on my normal work and met the Minister at meetings. Neither he nor I said a word to each other on this subject. Sometime later, his private Secretary came to my room and with a puzzled look handed over my note to the Minister in the same envelope in which I had sent it, but opened and resealed. When I opened it, there was nothing written on it. It was clear that the Minister had opened and read my note and then sent it back to me without any comment That didn’t matter. All I wanted was for him to see it. Not long after this episode, however, other events of a serious nature occurred which led to the resignation of the Minister.

As already recorded, relations between Mr. Athulathmudali and the President could have been best described as cool. Mr. Athulathmudali felt that the President was relentlessly trying to dig up something adverse or unsavoury about him. He felt that he was not being treated properly as an important Minister. He was getting into a frame of mind where he was becoming reluctant even to ask the President’s permission to travel abroad. He did not wish to be humiliated by a refusal.

The frustration the Minister was undergoing was seeping out from time to time. One day he told me “Surely when a man becomes President, he must have the capacity to rise above petty considerations, and be like a great father to all.” I suggested that he meet the President one to one and have a frank discussion on all matters. He didn’t think that it would work. But one day he seemed to have tried it. He told me that he told the President that he was still young and that he was in no hurry to play any role other than being a Minister until the President’s two terms of office were over.

“All I need to do is jog and keep myself fit” he had concluded. To this too, the response had been lukewarm. “I am not going to tolerate this constant humiliation,” he said. On another occasion he said, “Thank God you are my Secretary, otherwise I would have been finished.” He probably said this because he was aware that I was working with Mr. Paskaralingam behind the scenes to mitigate some of the problems and to resolve others that came up from time to time.

Mr. Paskaralingam whilst regretting some of the things that were happening, had also told the Minister that one positive feature was that the President had confidence in me. I was aware that Mr. Paskaralingam too was unhappy at the course of events and was doing whatever he could to mitigate problems. I was however not aware how far matters had gone until one morning in late August 1991, Mr. Athulathmudali telephoned in the morning and asked me to come to his private residence off Flower Road.

When I reached there at about 8.30 a.m. I realized at once that I had walked into a grave crisis situation. Mr. Gamini Dissanayake, Mr. G.M. Premachandra and others were there. Everyone looked tense and ill at ease. Vie Minister said that he had decided to resign. To my astonishment he added that they had taken steps to impeach the President . He said that he, Mr. Gamini Dissanayake and others were going to form a new party if it becomes necessary. A constitutional and political crisis of the first order were in the making.

To the great regret of everyone in the Ministry, Mr. Athulathmudali resigned as Minister on August 30, 1991. The President summoned all the Secretaries, Secretaries of Project Ministries and State Secretaries to an urgent meeting. He instructed us to be extra careful and diligent in running our Ministries. He said that he would deal with the political crisis. He did not want us to be distracted by it. He concluded by stating that he was a man well tempered by crises and the handling of them. This came out powerfully in the Sinhala words he used (“hondata themparadu una kenek”.) The atmosphere was tense and one of grave crisis.

Mr. Athulathmudali rang me and said that he would like to take formal leave of his officers in the Ministry. This was a legitimate request and I agreed. This decision, I had to take solely on my own responsibility. The government was in serious crisis. The President was in a position where he really couldn’t trust anybody. He did not know how many of his MPs and Ministers had signed the impeachment motion against him. This was with the Speaker of Parliament. The President had no access to it.

In this context, the other Ministers in the system were not even coming to office. They were too busy and preoccupied with urgent political matters. If I had asked any one of them about Mr. Athulathmudali’s request, they either would not have given a decision or advised me to play safe by refusing it. I therefore took the decision, knowing fully well that given the temper that the President was in and more particularly his burning anger against Mr. Athulathmudali, that perhaps my career was also coming to an end.

There were however, decencies to be observed. There were around 800 officers of all ranks and grades assembled on the ground floor at “Isurupaya” when Mr. Athulathmudali arrived in a private car. I now knew that more trouble was coming my way. Mr. Athulathmudali was going to address the staff. There were no Ministers present. In these circumstances, it would have been extremely churlish if I as Secretary did not speak on behalf of the Ministry and wish him well. But I had to utter these sentiments to someone who was spearheading an insurgency against the President, a President who was now an incensed and unforgiving one.

I was convinced in my own mind that this was the last speech that I was going to make in the public service, barring perhaps my own farewell speech, if indeed anyone dared to arrange a farewell for me. This was however, a duty I had to perform. I did not mince words. I spoke of Mr. Athulathmudali’s qualities both as a Minister and as a person, including his tolerance of different points of view, and his ability to take decisions quickly, his affability, his understanding and his commitment. On behalf of the Ministry, I wished him well for the future.

I did not know that there were newspaper reporters present. In any case it wouldn’t have mattered. The next day, some of my officers rushed into my room with the “Divaina,” newspaper. On page three of the paper was an account of the farewell function and a detailed verbatim report of my speech. I just could not quarrel with it. It was a brilliant report. The reporter was accurate to the last sentence and word. My officials were apprehensive about consequences. To the contrary I enjoyed a strange calm.

What had to be done was done and I was resigned to any consequence. I had crossed the Diyawanna if not the Rubicon. But nothing happened. Days passed. The political crisis passed through several phases. From time to time Neville Piyadigama, currently our Ambassador to Japan who was Additional Secretary to the President handling among other subjects, education, rang me to inquire whether there were any problems in the Ministry. My reply every time was “None whatever.”

At the very beginning of the crisis, I called up a meeting of all staff officers in the system and spoke to them of the necessity not to permit, political events to distract the Ministry from carrying out its national responsibilities. I reminded them that we were public servants and not politicians, and that whilst naturally we would be interested in what was going on, we needed to summon the discipline for it not to affect our work. I told them that it was our business to see that the Ministry ran without any hitch, until such time we had Ministers. I received one hundred percent support. It only confirmed my several previous experiences of what a marvelous-instrument the Sri Lanka Public Service was particularly when there was a crisis. Consistency of performance across the board in non crisis times was the problem.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.