Plenty of excitement to welcome 2026

The city of Colombo, especially Galle Face, has certainly been buzzing with excitement, since the start of the festive season!

The area around Galle Face Green has an awesome carnival atmosphere, and beautifully lit up, as well … including food stalls, music, and, of course, crowds.

The city’s got a great vibe, especially if you like food, shopping, or just soaking in the atmosphere.

With the year 2025 coming to an end, at midnight, 31st night revellers are ready to usher in 2026 … dancing the night away!

They have a choice, indeed, with most venues in the city ready to welcome the New Year … in style!

The ultimate New Year’s Eve bash, in the opinion of many, especially Colombo’s A-list crowd, is going to be ‘Dancing Through the Decades’, at the City of Dreams, Cinnamon Life, Colombo.

According to reports coming my way, Cinnamon Life is hosting the most epic party of the year – on December 31st.

The Lumina Ballroom will be transformed into a time machine, taking you on a musical journey through the decades.

Sri Lanka’s finest artistes will be around to provide star-class entertainment, and the lineup includes the sensational Sohan Weerasinghe, the charismatic Rukshan Perera, the electrifying Damian Wikramatillake, the fabulous Falan Andrea, the stunning Corrine Almeida, the legendary Geoffrey Fernando, and the versatile Clifford Richards.

The bands Flame and AROH will ignite the stage, while the incomparable Kumar de Silva will keep the crowd entertained … as the compere.

The action is from 8:00 PM onwards and ‘Dancing Through The Decades’ will culminate in a dazzling countdown to welcome 2026, with a sumptuous gourmet buffet and traditional Sri Lankan breakfast to follow.

With an incredible lineup of artistes and a night full of music, dance, and celebration, it’s going to be a fantastic way to bid farewell to 2025 and welcome 2026.

In fact, ‘Dancing Through The Decades’ is the brain child of the CEO of Cinnamon Life, Sanjiv Hulugalle, who requested Sohan to make the 31st night event the dance of the year.

Sohan also added that it was team work at Cinnamon Life that has paved the way to make this happening the dance of the year!

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.