The anatomy of the bond scam and the Ranil – Sirisena fallout

We decided that I should concentrate on economic affairs because the President was uncomfortable with PM Ranil taking all the decisions in this sphere without consulting him. In the Cabinet he was outnumbered by UNPers who were cock a hoop that they had secured a majority at the Parliamentary election. A cabal consisting of Ranil, Finance Minister Ravi Karunanayake, Malik Samarawickreme and Kabir Hashim were running their show together with Ranil’s crony Arjuna Mahendran who was appointed the Governor of the Central Bank overlooking the claims of many CB officials who had been senior to him when he was an employee there.

I was asked to serve in the Economic Committee presided over by Ranil which met every week to examine investment proposals which were submitted for approval. A small group led by me had a preparatory meeting which examined the proposals submitted. I was assisted by my CCS colleague R Paskaralingam who was a legend in the field of administration and Charitha Ratwatte who acted as Ranil’s “eyes and ears”. We were able to work harmoniously and get many projects which had stalled off the ground.

Soon our little group was taking all the decisions which, to be fair, were defended by Ranil both in Cabinet and Parliament. These two Committees became so powerful that many Cabinet ministers became envious particularly because we gave short shrift to the “unsolicited projects” they had sponsored and had benefited from under the Rajapaksa administration. President Sirisena however did not pressurize me at all perhaps because he knew the antecedents of tale carriers with their personal agendas.

Many of the major developments in the tourism, hotel, condominium, power, road and transport, hospitals and private educational institutions were flagged off by my Committee. The President and the PM got on reasonably well till a high magnitude storm called the “Central Bank Bond” scam hit the relationship. It changed the fate of the Yahapalanaya government and tarnished the name of the UNP, perhaps for ever. The bond scam brought the President into a situation when he had to call for an investigation of the activities of the Governor of the Central Bank. This created a rift in the government which could not be healed.

The alleged bond scam can be understood in the background of several misunderstandings. The first such contradiction was the suspicion that grew between the President and the Prime Minister. Here I noticed that it was Sirisena who was being set up by his disgruntled party ministers who were not allowed to interfere in economic matters as they did during MR’s time. They were playing on Sirisena’s socialist sympathies to put him on a collision path with Ranil.

These conspirators could be easily identified because they were the party men who later persuaded Sirisena to dismiss Ranil and bring in MR as PM till it was declared unlawful by the Supreme Court. It was a setback from which Sirisena never recovered and thereby limited his tenure to one term. The second contradiction was the conflict between Mahendran and the senior staffers of the Central Bank. Egged on by Finance Minister Ravi Karunanayake who called the Governor “uncle”, Mahendran did not attempt to maintain his “distance” from the Finance Ministry.

He often acted as a financial advisor to the UNP top brass. Mahendran then reshuffled senior positions in the Central Bank to place ambitious Assistant Governors in strategic positions so that he could have his way. The third contradiction was Mahendran’s proclivity to personally interfere in sacrosanct areas which may have been permitted in the private sector but not in a crucial national institution like the Central Bank. The Governor of the CB could not be a simple trumpet player in the UNPs financial band.

The subject of this “scam” was the decision of the Government to pay off construction contractors who were owed money by the MR administration. They had undertaken work on an assurance of payment, but the previous administration had defaulted. The UNP was keen to get them back to work, as infrastructure development had become the key to GDP growth. It was also well known that contractors were not averse to “kicking back” some of that money to political authorities – a practice which had begun under MR’s watch.

The “modus operandi” of raising these funds was the issuance of Treasury Bills and Bonds. Accordingly the CB correctly followed the procedures for the calling of such bids. These bids were received from several “brokers” including a company owned by Mahendran’s son-in-law Arjun Aloysious. It was at this stage that the drama takes a controversial turn. On finding that this bond issue was oversubscribed, the Central Bank decided to issue bonds for a much larger sum than advertised to the successful bidder on the same terms citing the urgent need for more funds as demanded by the Ministry of Finance.

It so happened that the successful bidder was a company owned by the son-in-law of Governor Mahendran. Also the Governor had shown an interest in the proceedings having come down from his top floor “duplex” to the downstairs floor of the bank where the selection process was taking place. It also did not help to know that the Governor – a citizen of Singapore who had his permanent residence there – lived in the selfsame house in Colombo with Aloysious when he was reporting for work in the Central Bank.

Further there was evidence that Aloysious had borrowed heavily from his regular lenders – one of whom had remarked that he was on the way to making a killing. There was at least a “prima facie” case for investigating this matter as senior CB officials were leaking (information) like sieve that this was, at least, an irregular act. At this stage the President acted without delay. He visited the CB and set up a Commission of Inquiry.

This irked Ranil who took up the position that it was understood in the governing coalition that Finance would come under his purview and that a Commission was unnecessary. Matters were further aggravated when Mahendran’s contract was not extended. Later he did not appear in Sri Lankan courts when he was noticed. All this contributed to a loss of confidence in the UNP and Ranil’s leadership which finally led to their being wiped out of the electoral map in 2020.

With the “Bond” scam creating headlines and a consequent crisis of confidence between the President and Prime Minister, Sirisena raised the ante by creating an Economic Council which reported direct to him. At Central Committee meetings of the SLFP, Ministers were constantly complaining that they were being sidelined. In effect they were complaining that they could not put their hands into the honeypot. To offset some of these complaints I began to send the minutes of my Committee to Cabinet under the hand of the PM.

At the same time Ranil designated Malik Samarawickreme to brief the President weekly of his meetings. Another rather unfortunate fact was that the subject of environment was under the President. Officials of the relevant departments when pulled up for inefficiency and bureaucratic ineptitude ran to the President to complain of harassment or insensitivity to environmental concerns. On several instances, including delays in building the southern highway, I had to set up meetings with Sirisena to expose his officials and press for quick action.

I must say, at no time did Ranil attempt to impose his views on me or take advantage over the President. It would be fair to say that in decision making by the SLFP Central Committee regarding the joint venture on Hambantota Port development and the proposed US 500 million grant under the Millennium Development Fund from the US, my views prevailed as acknowledged by President Sirisena later in time.

Without my intervention the SLFP would have sabotaged the Hambantota venture. It speaks volumes that now none of those early objectors, especially the Rajapaksas, are complaining of the Chinese managed Hambantota port. The latest reports show that it is one of the best managed ports in the region. According to the Hambantota Port authorities, the HIP had over 300 oil and gas cargo ships visiting it in 2023. This is a record 130 percent increase from its 2022 vessel calls.

They expect these figures to more than double in 2024. Says the Chief Operating Officer of HIP: “We have achieved our targets in spite of the surge in global oil prices as a result of the Ukraine and Palestine wars. With major projects and developments in infrastructure occurring simultaneously, the port manages vessel operations, handles manpower efficiently and have achieved all this within a completely accident free environment”.

But Sirisena’s Economic Council, headed by a Sri Lankan economist who had worked in an international organization was a non-starter. UNP ministers boycotted the meeting and the President did not have the acumen or the clout to take informed decisions in the field of economics. His hand picked Director too could not negotiate his way through the political and bureaucratic jungle and we ended up discussing economic problems like obstacles to investment, poverty reduction and increasing employment opportunities for youth.

But we were without budgetary provisions which were in the hands of UNP ministers. By this time the two factions – UNP and SLFP – were hardly talking to each other. The bond scam was turning the political arena upside down and Sirisena decided to go for a limited reshuffle to show his displeasure. The main objective was to replace Ravi Karunanayake as Finance Minister. This post was given to Mangala Samaraweera and Ravi was made Minister of Foreign Affairs. I was given a mega Ministry which was named Science, Technology, Research, Skills Development, Vocational Training and Kandyan heritage. It was a position which I liked very much.

Vocational training is a crucial aspect of our development effort. While educational authorities have had a lopsided view in emphasizing University education, the demand both from students and the economy is for technical education which is better suited to market conditions. The demand for foreign employment which is virtually closed to Sinhala or Tamil educated arts graduates, is clearly open for those with technical skills.

I was horrified to find out that my new Ministry had taken administrative decisions which discouraged broad based technical education. The Ministries vocational syllabus is ranged from National Vocational Qualification [NVQ] 1-5 in ascending order. The Ministry of Science and Technology had added a qualification that NVQ3 and above needed an English language proficiency as well. While the good intentions of these administrators were clear enough, their rules inhibited a large number of skilled trainees from getting advanced knowledge, as the standards of our English language paper was too high for them.

The net result was that enrollment was dropping and students were turning to private teaching institutions. I changed that order making the English language paper non mandatory and enrollment increased dramatically. At the same time I speeded up the construction of our centres for specialized fields.

Our show-piece was the large training centre at Orugodawatte, donated by South Korea, which specialized in training in motor mechanism. It was designed to service the local motor car industry as well as those who went abroad for employment. In Unawatuna, a centre for training in skills for tourism was completed and opened by me. A large complex for IT parts manufacture training was started in Minneriya with aid from the Netherlands. Two modern multi purpose training centres were opened in Kilinochchi and Matara which were funded by the FRG.

In Kilinochchi I talked to many of the ex-LTTE combatants, some of them horribly maimed in the war, who were training there. They could not believe that they had been selected for training in spite of their antecedents. I upgraded our training centres in Badulla and Minipe which had languished because of the English language barrier. On the invitation of my friend, Minister Athaulla, I visited the Eastern province. My first port of call was the celebrated Hardy Institute in Amparai which had once been a model training institute.

It is in the environs of the Galoya valley and was set up with Canadian aid to service the giant river valley scheme which was our pride in the immediate post independence era. I also upgraded the Kalmunai training centre. All these field visits brought back memories of my tours as Minister of Irrigation decades ago and also emphasized the need for Ministers to make on the spot inspections which I had learnt as a young civil servant. I was a regular visitor to the Kondawatuwan bungalow of the Gal Oya board.

The jewel in our crown was the Katubedde Technical Training Institute which had been nurtured by its Principal – my Trinity classmate, Sarath Ilukkumbura. This Institute had trained hundreds of high class technicians who have served both here and abroad. Its alumni, many domiciled in Australia, still make contributions of equipment to this centre. I was glad to organize a meeting to thank Illukkumbura for his contribution. He was ailing at that time and died not long after. He and his family were grateful for our recognition of his services.

Since I was the Minister in charge of Science, I and a delegation of scientists were invited to participate in the annual high level Science conference of Japan which in that year was held in Kyoto – the famous ancient city. The Japanese Minister in charge of Science was the former Finance Minister and my friend Koji Omi who was a close confidante of PM Shinto Abe.

Abe himself graced the opening ceremony and showcased the dramatic advances made by Japan in frontier technology. Representatives of Japanese manufacturing companies which dealt with artificial intelligence, robotics, new communications technology, transportation, aeronautics and many other fields exhibited their wares. The Japanese educational system is credited with producing a science based culture. However as visitors we were also introduced to Kyoto culture including an evening with the country’s greatest Kabuki actors. I also prayed at the famous Hoganji temple of Kyoto which was visited by Olcott and Anagarika Dharmapala on their first visit to Japan. Hoganji contributed to the Theravada Buddhist renaissance which began in the last decades of the nineteenth century.

A visit to the ancient quarter of the city – with its narrow path ways and softly lit establishments with red lanterns swaying in the wind to which giggling Geishas came and went-was an experience of a lifetime. I recalled with a shudder that the Americans nearly dropped their atomic bomb on this wonderful city towards the end of the second world war. From Kyoto we took the “Shinkashen” [high speed train] to Tokyo and after a few days there headed for home.

Soldiering on after the Central Bank bomb and intricacies to tender boards

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.