Ogilvy Group tops award tally at Dragons of Sri Lanka 2026

Ogilvy Group Sri Lanka delivered a standout performance at the recently concluded Dragons of Sri Lanka 2026 Awards, securing a total of nine awards comprising two Gold Dragons, one Silver Dragon and six Black Dragons, among the festival’s highest overall award tallies.

Gold Dragon wins for Phoenix Ogilvy and Ogilvy Digital, together with the seven additional recognitions across multiple categories, highlighted Ogilvy’s ability to combine creativity, strategic thinking and commercial effectiveness to deliver business results.

Organised by the 4As Sri Lanka, the third edition of Dragons of Sri Lanka shortlisted more than 50 agencies and corporates, making it one of the country’s most competitive marketing communications awards. These local awards, along with the chapters in Malaysia and Pakistan are part of the Dragons of Asia platform,one of the region’s leading programmes for marketing communications effectiveness, with entries being judged on strategy, originality, execution and measurable results.

Ogilvy Digital accounted for eight awards in total, including a Gold Dragon in the Business & Trade Marketing category, and a Silver Dragon in the Innovative Idea or Concept category. The Agency additionally received six Black Dragons across the categories of Innovative Idea or Concept, Business & Trade Marketing, Content Creation, Small Budget, Event or Experiential, and Brand Trial or Sales Generation.

Commenting on the achievement, Sajith Weerasinghe, Chief Operating Officer of Ogilvy Digital said, “We’re proud that this achievement spans multiple clients, categories and types of work, reflecting both the versatility of our people and our commitment to delivering results.”

The Ogilvy Group’s second Gold Dragon win was Phoenix Ogilvy’s recognition in the Product Launch or Re-Launch category for the relaunch of American Premium Water. It was a multi-dimensional campaign which refreshed the identity and rejuvenated the positioning of one of Sri Lanka’s pioneering bottled drinking water brands, bolstering its 30-year heritage while connecting with a new generation of consumers.

Commenting on the win, Siddhartha Roy, Chief Operating Officer at Phoenix Ogilvy said, “American Premium Water has been a trusted name in Sri Lanka for more than three decades, but the challenge was to make it relevant and compelling for a new generation of consumers. We created a new blueprint for the brand’s positioning, proposition and visual identity, and manifested it through design, packaging and storytelling. To see that transformation recognised with a Gold Dragon, and more importantly reflected in the brand’s renewed momentum in the market, makes this a particularly rewarding achievement.”