SLISM to host CXM Conference 2026

The Sri Lanka Institute of Service Management (SLISM) has announced it will be hosting the much-awaited Customer Experience Management (CXM) Conference 2026 on February 11, 2026, at the Cinnamon Life, Colombo. Under the theme “CX Revolution: AI, Personalisation, and Beyond,” the event is set to be a key gathering for customer experience professionals in the region.

This conference will bring together business leaders, entrepreneurs, C-suite executives, customer experience (CX) strategists and practitioners, technology innovators, and business executives to explore the advantages of the transformative power of artificial intelligence, data analytics, and hyper-personalisation in redefining how organisations create and deliver real customer value.

This event will feature addresses from global thought leaders, in-depth expert panel discussions, and interactive workshops. Participants will gain insights into emerging CX trends and have opportunities to network with the leaders in shaping the future of service excellence.

Speaking about the strategic vision for the event, SLISM CXM, Conference Chair 2026 Nishantha Gunasekara said, “We are at a turning point where technology and humanity converge in customer service. The CXM Conference 2026 will emphasise how organisations can harness AI and automation to create meaningful and personalised experiences, while still maintaining the human touch that builds trust and connection.”

Sharing his innovative vision, SLISM President Yasa Karunarathne said, “We believe that as the apex body, our primary duty is to lay the foundation. That’s why the CXM Conference 2026 is so crucial—it will equip local corporates to harness technology not at the expense of human connection, but to enhance it, creating a new paradigm of authentic customer engagement.”

SLISM invites organisations, corporate partners, and professionals to participate. The institute offers high-impact visibility and engagement opportunities through several sponsorship tiers, including Platinum, Gold, Silver, and Supporting Partner categories.