Choco-Tom Reunion: A Toyland Anecdote

Dear Meth, I was highly pleased when you found me in my home garden where the lawn had undergone so much damage as a result of the Cyclonic Storm Ditwah in the days. November 26-December 04, 2025. The sense of security I felt in your hands urged me to tell you who I am, what sort of a past I had, and how I feel now.

Having lost contact with my mother, I had been extremely sad and frustrated. I had almost lost hopes about seeing her again. But my dream of sitting in the lap of my mother became a reality once again when you reported to my former guardians, Gamini and Dammi, about your finding me in the wet lawn. I remember with pleasure how they quickly brought my mother back to me and placed me in her lap as I used to sit before. So I am again a happy bear kid enjoying the warmth of my mother.

For the last thirty five years, my home has been an old house called “Bellaria”, situated in BANDARAWELA, in the salubrious cool climes of Sri Lanka. My former guardians, Gamini and Dammi, treated my mother “Choco”, in whose lap I have been always seated, and me, “Tom”, with tremendous love and care. They gave us our names, based on our skin colours. My mother is dark chocolate brown in complexion, so they named her “Choco”, and I am tomato orange in complexion, and they named me “Tom”.

We came to Sri Lanka from the small peninsula town called Glücksburg-Holnis, in Northern Germany in October 1990. When Gamini visited Germany at that time, we were presented to him by our previous guardian, Dora. From Germany we made our trip via Switzerland, Scotland, and England.

My mother told me that we were designed by an artist who seemed to have had a clear idea about the real bears in the forests. To be honest, we both have never seen a real bear, and do not know how a real bear would react to us during an encounter. I mean whether a real bear would laugh at us, or pounce on us, or at least wink at us. However, we have heard that the real bears are shy and prefer isolation. I must apologise that we are not so. We are both in a sitting position, entertaining our guardians, and their visitors. They all get cheered up by our looks, and we hear them often making the remark, “Oh how cute you are!” If we stand up and stretch ourselves, my height may be 15mm, and my mother’s, 30mm. We are made of plastic. So, maybe, a real bear would ignore us for our insignificant sizes.

About 36 years ago, when we came out of a toy factory in Germany together with hundreds of bear mothers and bear children, I was wondering whether we could make any significant impact on the humans we would meet. We were all packed in small boxes and transported to toy shops. I was relieved when we were taken out of our box and set on a shelf in a showcase in a toy shop. While sitting in my mother’s lap, I kept gazing at the visitors to the shop. Small girls and boys found us funny, while big ladies and gentlemen remarked that we were so cute. Some were very indifferent to us and deliberately ignored us. So we had a time of uncertainty on a shelf in a showcase for so many months.

One day, we managed to impress a fine lady from Glücksburg-Holnis, in Northern Germany. She was Dora. She took us both in her hand, set us on her palm carefully, and gazed at us sharply, studying how we looked. We heard her say to her husband Wilhelm that we both looked so cute. So they picked us from the shop, brought us home, and placed us on Dora’s piano. We kept enjoying to the beautiful melodies she played on the piano, and had a jolly time, listening to the always theatrical conversations that took place with different personalities in their drawing room. Gamini was there in August 1990, and when he was leaving, along with many other toys, we were both given to him, as he and his wife Dammi had two small boys called Nivanka and Danilo. We were again safely packed in a brown paper bag and kept in Gamini’s luggage until we were taken out on his return home.

We sensed the difference between our departure from Germany in Northern Europe and our arrival in the tropical island of Sri Lanka in Asia. In our new dwelling, we were kept on a shelf along with so many different curios. We were the tiniest among all toys in the house, and Gamini and Dammi were both very careful about us. They even allowed Nivanka and Danilo to touch us only when the whole family were there. A few years later, their girl Gaavithri came to the world. When she was a tiny baby, we could cheer her up without any lullabies or a fairy tales. She became our friend in no time. They all grew bigger and bigger, and we became more and more distant from them. We always remained confined to our shelf. However, Gamini and Dammi did never isolate us. They looked at us every now and then while cleaning the house, and taking out the books from the shelves.

From July to November 2025, the house underwent an overall restoration. It started with the replacement of the ceiling with a new one, and went on to the re-plastering of the walls and polishing the doors and windows, and ended up painting the floor with titanium. Because of the dust getting accumulated every day, Gamini and Dammi spent the night in a different house that belongs to them. The house was in the care of some total strangers. The furniture was being dismantled and placed in the back of the house. The small objects were packed and put in different places. The curios among which we used to be kept were put in boxes and taken to a different place.

In the process, I fell off from the shelf, and got lost in the dust being swept off from the floor. Towards mid-November, the restoration was complete and Gamini and Dammi returned to the house and started rearranging it. The furniture was installed in the order it used to be, the books were sorted and shelved according to their subjects, and the articles were returned to the places they belonged to. I was swept out and was always praying for the attention of either Gamini or Dammi or any other responsible person who could save me.

During the Cyclonic Storm Ditwah of Nov-Dec 2025 that lasted over a week, there were heavy showers from morning till evening. Stuck among the reeds of grass on a mound, I remained scared of being either dashed away in a torrent of water or buried under a heap of mud. I really felt my inability to get hold of anything during the floating, or walk into a safe place, or make a cry for help. I felt I was just a lump of plastic without any power at all. While wondering what I should do, I once heard Gamini telling Dammi that I was missing. I realised then that my mother is still safe inside the house. Then I felt the sorrow she would suffer in my absence. She has her legs always stretched out to keep me on her lap. Without me there, in her usual posture with her legs outstretched, she looks empty. That means without me, she has no value. We depend on each other to fulfil the meaning of our existence.

Day by day the weather improved. There were periods of sunshine every day. The torrential showers stopped. The ground became a little solid once again. I see Gamini and Dammi moving around. Yet I had no way of telling them about my presence or clinging on to them asking for help. I have thus spent nearly five months in the open air. I was wondering how long I would last like this.

One day, there was a happy crowd in my home garden. They were enjoying the beautiful weather that day. They were you, Meth, your brother Seth, your parents, and six of your relations. I remember you moving around playfully, yet you were not as mischievous as most children I have heard of. Meanwhile, Meth, in your pair of spectacles, you looked at the ground carefully. I was praying for your attention. Finally, you reached me and picked me up from the mud. You looked overjoyed by your discovery. I was thrilled to hear you shout to everybody, “Hey, see what I have found!” I had no words to express my pleasure.

Excited by what was going on, I remember Gamini coming out and studying what had been found. He recognised me immediately and brought my mother to you. He carefully placed me on my mother’s lap. So we could sit together and make a show of mother and son love. I was highly pampered in my mother’s lap, a luxury I had missed for a long time. Because of your excitement, you happened to drop me on the ground once again. Then I was so upset, but your very kind mother found me again, and fitted me in my place.

It was good that your mother decided to release us only once you all have arrived home. So, in a few minutes, you all took leave of my former guardians Gamini and Dammi, and moved to my present dwelling at Weligalle. I am happy again with my mother in the care of you and your family at this beautiful home. Meth, please make sure that I always keep sitting on the lap of my mother. That is the only joy I have in life. Thank you.

(The writer of this story holds a BA (Kelaniya), MA (Edinburgh), PhD (Vaasa), FRSA, is Professor Emeritus of English, Department of English & Linguistics, University of Ruhuna)

Quitting the UNP and battling in the Supreme Court to save our seats

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.