Second incubation centre of Science and Technology Ministry opens at Faculty of Agriculture, Ruhuna

The opening of the ‘Harvest Centre’, a technology incubation centre specifically established for the Southern Province  at the Faculty of Agriculture, University of Ruhuna was held recently.

It is expected to develop and nurture entrepreneurship, innovation, research commercialisation and start-ups in the Southern Province through this ‘Harvest Centre’.

The Centre is an outcome of a collaborative effort of the Science and Technology Ministry and the Faculty of Agriculture, University of Ruhuna and the opening was under the patronage of the Science and Technology Minister Prof. Chrishantha Abeysena, and the Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handunnetti.

The Vidatha program is being implemented as a key national program of the Science and Technology Ministry to transfer technology to the village. This program supports the growth of small and medium-scale enterprises, including the creation of value-added products of rural natural resources through science, technology and innovative knowledge, whilst implementing appropriate mechanisms to promote entrepreneurship throughout Sri Lanka. Vidatha centres have been established at the Divisional Secretary’s Division level throughout the island for this purpose and as a comprehensive and progressive step, Technology Incubator centres are being established in state universities, with the aim of developing and strengthening innovation, entrepreneurship and small and medium-sized enterprises, with special focus on entrepreneurs, inventors and start-ups.

‘Harvest Centre’ is the second Technology Incubator Centre to be established by the Science and Technology Ministry which will contribute towards revitalising the economy by strengthening local industries. This will enable interested small and medium scale entrepreneurs in the districts of Matara, Galle and Hambantota to add value to their products and develop their businesses on a scientific basis which will assist them in conquering both domestic and foreign markets by meeting national and international standards.

Through this centre, established to promote development in the agribusiness and food technology sectors in the southern region, it is expected to provide entrepreneurs with research and test reports and scientific reports on food quality and standards from university laboratories, modern packaging advice and facilities suitable for the international market, technical and management knowledge necessary to successfully run a business with University lecturers providing technical advice and guidance required for the commercialisation of new products, their introduction to the market, and technology transfer.

The event was attended by Deputy Minister of Energy Arkam Ilyas, Matara District Parliamentarians Professor L.M. Abeywickrama and Ajantha Gammeddage, Science and Technology Ministry Secretary Mohamed Navavi, University of Ruhuna Vice-Chancellor Prof. P.A. Jayantha, Faculty of Agriculture Dean Prof. G.Y. Jayasinghe, Government officials, scholars and a large group of people.