Natural Disasters

One’s thoughts, deep concern and sorrow; the media and peoples’conversation has been the late November cyclone. To quote Internet Tuesday 2 December: “Latest assessments continue to reveal the extensive scale of Cyclone Dilwah’s impact, with widespread flooding and landslides deepening humanitarian needs across the county. Updated government figures report 366 deaths and 367 missing, with 1,151,776 (316,366 families) affected across all 25 districts.” We question whether the tsunami or this cylcone caused more disastrous damage. I opine that the cyclone caused much more damage, even though less lost lives than on 2004.

Personally our area in Colombo had electricity and water with no interruption. Kandy, later told by relatives, suffered a continuous blackout and inability to charge cell phones – being the least of difficulties suffered by people in town, suburbs and proximate hamlets. A man Friday who is such a help kept vigil on the bank of the Kelani Ganga as a spot in the bund restraining the water was in danger of breaching. Slight fissures occurred but no dreaded flood. When I phoned him before he joined the men of the area and the police, his reply was the usual Sri Lanka response of ‘karume’. and ‘what to do’. Jaffna campus was closed for a week because of floods in that usually parched Northern Peninsula.

I found these statistics retrieved by googling. “The Yangtze-Huai or China River Floods 1931 – 3.7 million dead – was the world’s deadliest natural disaster in the 20th century. Other disasters are graded thus: tsunami 42%, earthquake 35%, hurricane 33%, wildfires 30%, heatwave or drought 6%, blizzard 4%, mudslide 4%.

Ceylon/Sri Lanka has suffered all the above except earthquakes and wildfires which are limited to small areas and not causing too much damage. Unforgiveable is that villagers set fire to hillocks to get burnt flesh of rabbits, mostly. I saw an adjoining slope on fire while on a meditation retreat past the Peradeniya University. Raising an alarm I was told it was a deliberate act of arson when greed overtook sense and kindness for nature.

A monastic who names himself in his videos as English Buddhist Monk, living near Bentota, released a video named “Cyclone and Buddhism”. He gave an account of his days during the height of Cyclone Dilwah, continuing his daily practice of going pinna patha – daily alms round for his one meal a day – even when it was raining sheets of water. He walks barefoot, thus braving centipedes, even snakes in the water. He had to climb over a fallen tree, the fallen tree being five feet above the ground, which he did. People in the locality were full of loving care but he insisted on the food-begging round. He found the much loved trees in his garden fallen. All these were mentioned to emphasize the basic truths of Buddhism: impermanence; inability for us to control certain events; futility of clinging and the compassion of communities and uniting for the common good and safety during crises.

Very different to how politicians acted recently. The Opposition raised a furor accusing the government of not taking due notice of weather warnings. One suggestion was that wevas and reservoirs should have been carefully made to release water in view of the impending cyclone. But its path could suddenly veer from its forecast path. Then what if there is no rain? In times of national crisis, MPS should all unite, not squabble and promote individual clout: as an ex minister had gone on a food distribution campaign with his TV cameras. The affected victims had booed him off. What heartless opportunists – most politicians.

Many readers will not know about the 1947 floods. We had it badly in Kandy with Getambe covered by risen Mahaveli water. Agriculture buildings were submerged, so also residences. We were in a school hostel but though vacation was given, we stayed on in the hostel because family members could not travel to take us home. We 32 kids had a good time with the matron asking us to move tables and chairs and ballroom dance or play games all day.

But disaster intruded. We heard of a favourite teacher’s family living in Getambe losing their home and she her engagement ring and wedding clothes. She was to be married soon. Another incident was Mary’s mother arriving totally distraught. Mary was a British planter’s daughter with a simple Sinhala wife. He paid for Mary’s education etc. The weeping woman’s lament was their house was washed away. The planter was on furlough in Britain. Mary’s birth secret and reason for her colour were exposed.

It was due to the small temple opposite the Getambe residence of monks being submerged in water but not damaged that conferred on it an aura of sanctity. Not one roof tile had moved out of place, From then on, this little temple had traffic stopping on their way to Kandy or leaving it. Bara – money donations -were offered to the temple to ensure the safety of the travellers.

I have been sent poems and songs about the disaster composed so soon. In all of them, the final conclusion is that the soul of Sri Lanka is resilient and we will rise from this like we have so many times in the past. Countries and world organizations have stepped forth to help us in various ways, mostly for infrastructure rebuilding like the upcountry railway line and stations. India and Pakistan were the first to come to our aid, one nation allowing the other to fly through their air space.

We are confident the received money will be sent to where it is needed by the anti- corruption government. Not like the Helping Hambantota syphoned off tsunami financial aid!

State Engineering Corporation under Kulasinghe and the lead-up to an amusing incident

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.