Malaysian Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry explores investment opportunities in Sri Lanka

Malaysian Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Penang (MAICCI) President S. Parthiban led a 15-member team to the Board of Investment (BOI) to explore potential FDI opportunities in Sri Lanka.

The Malaysian investor team represented a diverse range of sectors, including ICT, banking, value-added agriculture, mining, IT infrastructure (data center development), fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG), manufacturing, healthcare, recycling, semiconductors, waste management, hospitality, business consulting, and biotechnology, along with a representative from the Prime Minister's department.

The BOI conducted full-day FDI promotion session which also included participation from various stakeholder agencies and ministries, such as the Urban Development Authority, Colombo Port City, Sri Lanka Export Development Board, Information Communication Technology Agency of Sri Lanka, Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Authority, Department of Commerce, Port City Commission, and CHEC Port City Colombo.

MAICCI's membership includes the State and District Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry in Malaysia. It is a member of the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Malaysia (NCCIM).

MAICCI’s activities are broad, covering various aspects of the private sector and government, including trading, policy issues, entrepreneur support, business counseling, networking within Malaysia and internationally, investment, and human resource development.

The senior members of the BOI, led by Director General Renuka M. Weerakone, provided a detailed overview of the BOI facility and business ecosystem to the Malaysian investors. They also explained the available investment opportunities and structured projects ready for immediate investment.

Presidential Advisor on Digital Economy Dr. Hans Wijesuriya, GovTech CEO Sanjaya Karunsena, EDB Chairman Mangala Wijesinghe, Colombo Port City Economic Commission Director General Raven Wickremasuriya, Head of the Trade Promotion Division and Bilateral Affairs Charitha Yattogoda, Sri Lanka Sustainable Authority Deputy Director General Chaminda Jayasekera, CHEC Port City Colombo.

Assistant Managing Director Bai Xiaping and other senior officials of the ministries and Government agencies also participated.

The meeting was organised to demonstrate to the Sri Lankan business ecosystem its readiness to attract diverse business ventures from Malaysia, with each collaborative Sri Lankan agency presenting potential business opportunities, essential infrastructure facilities to support foreign direct investment (FDI), and the attractive lifestyle options that investors can enjoy in Sri Lanka.

The Information and Communication Technology Agency of Sri Lanka presented the national plan for digitally enabling the country and its potential to lead in Industry 4.0 as part of the government's digital transformation journey, while GovTech Sri Lanka, the lead implementation agency for this transformation, outlined its role in facilitating ease of doing business and the future of digitalisation in Sri Lanka.

The Export Development Board presentation further explains the export development landscape and the opportunity value of “Made in Sri Lanka.” The facilitation provided by the BOI to exporters in the country benefits FDI seekers by creating opportunities to start businesses in Sri Lanka, leveraging the product and market potential, as well as our unique brand equity, which could serve as a strong launch pad for any new FDIs.

The Urban Development Board explained the urban area development with available land in the heart of Colombo city and commercially viable land for real estate investment with mixed development, education and technology, hotels and tourism, and theme parks. Additionally, information about land availability for various sectors across the country was provided.

The diverse representation of FDI opportunities led the Malaysian delegation to express interest in the renewable energy sector, specifically solar energy-saving solutions, as well as in ICT infrastructure development, including data centers, networking, cybersecurity, access control, PA systems, BMS, AV systems, and software solutions. The few companies that already have business experience in Malaysia express interest in sustainable sectors, showing the opportunities in waste management and recycling (plastic and metal). Further, it was noted that traditional trading houses also represented the delegation, and the delegations showed more interest in manufacturing aviation parts and services, oil and lubricants, sustainable products and packaging, import and export, and Original Equipment Manufacturing.  The notable representation of the century-old spice business during the session seeks more opportunities for Agri-processing—food manufacturing, integrated food solutions, and spice value chains, including Halal-certified products.

On the second day, 31 March 2026, the delegation met with the Malaysian Business Council at Marine Bay, Colombo, followed by a networking lunch. The program also included a visit to the Katunayake Export Processing Zone (EPZ) and a factory visit to KIK, providing first hand exposure to Sri Lanka’s industrial environment. Overall, the visit enhanced investment cooperation, promoted awareness of key sectors, and facilitated potential partnerships and investment opportunities between the two countries.