“Best in Class”

CBL Foods International (Pvt) Ltd, a subsidiary of CBL Group, has been recognised with the Global Performance Excellence Award (GPEA) 2025 – Best in Class, presented by the Asia Pacific Quality Organization (APQO) at its 30th International Conference held in Beijing, China. The company was also honoured with the APQO International Best Practice – Silver Award at the same forum.

CBL Foods International is a leading food manufacturer specialising in chocolates, biscuits, cakes, wafers, rice crackers, and candy bars. With a strong focus on research and development, innovation, and sustainability, the company has played a pivotal role in introducing new product innovations and elevating quality standards in the food industry.

“Quality has always been our number one priority at CBL Group. It is the foundation of our reputation and trust. We never compromise on quality because every product that leaves our facilities carries the pride of our people and the promise of our purpose. As a company with humble Sri Lankan roots and a growing international footprint, we are proud to set benchmarks for the confectionery industry — proving that a Sri Lankan business can achieve and sustain world-class standards,” said Kamal Geeganage, Chief Executive Officer of CBL Foods International (Pvt) Ltd.

The Global Performance Excellence Awards, organised by APQO, are the only formal international recognition for business excellence in the Asia-Pacific region. The awards promote the adoption of world-class quality and performance management practices and recognise organisations that demonstrate exceptional results in leadership, strategy, customer engagement, workforce development, and operational performance.

LK Domain Registry empowers Sri Lankans to create their own digital identity with myPage.lk

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.