Sobering economic reality

Budget 2026 is around the corner, and speculation is rife in political circles that the Provincial Council elections will be held early next year. Chances are that the government will present an election-oriented budget and play Santa to garner favour with the electorate in a bid to recover lost ground. At the time of writing, it was reported that an alliance of Opposition parties had won the Udunuwara Cooperative Society election, securing all slots on the board of directors, leaving none for the NPP. Political parties throw their weight behind the candidates contesting co-operative society elections, which serve as political windsocks.

The government is emulating its predecessors in trying to shore up its approval ratings. It has decided to launch a massive state sector recruitment drive amidst pressure from the World Bank to downsize the state service, which is bursting at the seams. It has also launched some mega development projects.

Meanwhile, Sri Lanka has imported more than 37,000 cars and 160,000 motorcycles so far this year, according to media reports. Nearly USD 1 billion has been spent on vehicle imports. Taxes on imported vehicles have risen exponentially, and this is one of the reasons why the government’s revenue has increased considerably. An increase in state revenue is most welcome, but a fine balance has to be maintained between imports aimed at boosting tax revenue and the forex outflow. This is a financial high-wire act that is best left to economists, who must be allowed to make decisions, free from political interference. That is the way to prevent another forex crisis from emerging and leading to a situation where all vehicles, including the newly imported ones, will have to wait in long lines near refilling stations for days on end again.

Fitch Ratings has affirmed Sri Lanka’s Long-Term Foreign-Currency Issuer Default Rating at ‘CCC+’. There is a long way to go, and the government should tread cautiously. Fitch has noted that Sri Lanka’s sovereign rating remains ‘constrained by elevated general government indebtedness and a high interest-revenue ratio despite the completion of the sovereign’s debt restructuring in 2024’. The need for economic reforms cannot be overstated. President Ranil Wickremesinghe (2022-2024) made a host of vital yet unpopular decisions to manage the economic crisis. The biggest challenge for the NPP government is to maintain the growth momentum.

Meanwhile, the US has, in its 2025 Investment Climate Statements, told the NPP government a home truth. While appreciating the fact that the 5 percent GDP growth in 2024 has exceeded expectations, the US has said Sri Lanka’s investment climate remains challenging. “The NPP’s commitment to the country’s $3 billion, four-year (2023-2027) Extended Fund Facility IMF program reassured investors, but many remain wary given the NPP leadership’s historically anti-Western, Marxist-influenced ideology.” One may argue that the US is averse to the JVP’s affinity for the Chinese economic and political models, but it has apparently read the minds of foreign investors accurately. “Give a dog a bad name and hang him,” they say. The JVP finds itself in a Catch-22 situation. Its Marxist political orientation has stood in the way of the NPP government’s efforts to attract foreign investment, but it cannot renounce its ideological shibboleths lest it should alienate its cadres.

Thus, the JVP’s domineering old guard, which calls the shots in the NPP government, has become a liability for the incumbent government where foreign investor confidence is concerned. Moneybags in the sin stock sectors, such as gambling, may not mind parking their black money anywhere in the world, but those who are engaged in ethical and socially responsible investing are wary of taking unnecessary risks in the countries ruled by ideologically confused governments experiencing dialectical tensions between fractions represented by neoliberals and dyed-in-the-wool leftists still living in the Cold War era. Having chosen to run with the Marxist hare and hunt with the neoliberal hounds for political expediency, the JVP is apparently at a loss, unable to figure out whether it is running or hunting, so to speak. The time has come for it to stop signalling left and tuning right, and vice versa, and decide which way to go.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.