Review on The Ceylon Journal Volume 2 Number 2

The Ceylon Journal’s fourth installment (Vol. 2 No. 2) was published at a poignant moment in Sri Lankan history. The Cyclone Ditwah  has caused the demise of 486 Sri Lankans with over a million affected as of now. This was the first time in our history that all four main rivers have overflown simultaneously. The locals have shown their resilience and the Lankan diaspora has stood in solidarity with the unfortunate souls. Things have been at a standstill. However, the team behind The Ceylon Journal have continued with unabated momentum. Credit to where it’s due.

The team comprises of some of Sri Lanka’s finest in their diverse fields. It is a testament to their collective goodwill and cooperation that The Ceylon Journal has got off the mark and is flourishing. An increased circulation is evidence to it. The Patron Desamanya M.D.D.Peiris and the Editor-in-Chief Avishka Senewiratne are truly a dynamic duo.

Avishka is no stranger to any reader of the Ceylon Journal. His works have been read in at least four continents. From an amateur who started off his literary career by writing about his school he has blossomed into a bona fide multifaceted writer. He is now an acclaimed writer on matters ranging from the history of our Island nation, its colonial times, political evolution and the arts. He has ventured into the field of the Press and Demographics lately. This writer is fortunate to be acquainted with Senewiratne. They collaborated in bringing to you the story of how the Sri Lankan parliament was shifted from Galle Face to the present location at Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte in the last publication of The Ceylon Journal (Volume 2 Number 1).

The latest volume of magazine has once again done its readers proud. Those who shall get their hands on the copies will gather a wealth of knowledge encompassing aviation, Buddhism, flora and fauna, sociology, demographics, archaeology, public transport et al.

Any local or tourist when thinking of Sri Lanka shall definitely have a mental image of its famous elephants. Those gentle giants who face so many challenges to their existence today have been highlighted in a way not seen before by Professor C. R. de Silva. This is not some exercise in academia which will hold the interest of those already familiar with some facts before fading into obscurity. It is a beautifully articulated piece on those majestic beasts who form such an indelible imprint on our Lankan psyche that can be read by anyone. This writer found it absorbing.

Buddhism and Sri Lanka are inseparably intertwined. The novel  Siddhartha published in 1922 written by Hermann Hesse is a book that is more than worthy of a read. On November 12, 1911, Hesse travelled by train from Colombo to Kandy to visit the Temple of the Tooth. It must be said that Hesse’s relationship with the orient was mostly with India rather than Sri Lanka. He regarded India not so much as a physical destination but as an intellectual and spiritual homeland. His visit to our island was also borne out of that relationship. Hesse may perhaps be the most famous German to write on Ceylon, but there were other notable writers too, such as Geiger and Gueth. To know more, peruse the article written so well by Asoka Mendis De Zoysa. It is a very well researched and well presented piece of work.

Undoubtedly the most pleasing aspect of The Ceylon Journal is the images that one comes across within its pages. The quip bordering on  cliché is that ‘a picture is worth a thousand words’. This is especially true when it comes to The Ceylon Journal. It is not some ordinary publication that are dime a dozen.

The images included in The Ceylon Journal are almost always diligently handpicked before undergoing a process of vetting. It is little doubt that the readers who have given a feedback have often commented on the vitality that it’s images lend to The publication. Illuminating and delightful, they enhance the reading pleasure of its purchasers.

Much has been written of the foremost Sinhalese writer of the 20th century, Martin Wickremasinghe. However what is said of him in the new issue of the Journal presented him to me in a hitherto unseen light. Anyone with a link to Ceylon has, at one point in his or her life read a work of Wickremasinghe. However such is the stature he has attained, the famed author continues to be an object of interest well after his demise. Uditha Devapriya’s article on him in the Journal is incisive without being overtly critical. It narrates what shaped Wickremasinghe to who he became as well as his similarities and contrasts with his contemporaries.

Our little island is regularly one of the top global tourist destinations. One of the immersive experiences it offers are the picturesque train rides for the visitors. After December’s disaster, only 478 km remained operative of the 1,593 km railway network. Time will see it restored back to the former condition. This journal contains the story of how the Uda-Pussellawa railway line came into fruition. It is an engaging article which covers not merely the facts and figures but also explains the context within which the railway line was found to be a necessity. It must also be said that this piece of locomotive history ceased its operations in the year 1948 when Ceylon obtained her independence. Researching on a defunct railway is a taxing endeavor but Prof. Indrani Munasinghe deserves kudos for a job well done and an article well written.

Many a time have we wined and dined, or been wined and dined at the Dutch Burgher Union located at the famous ‘thunmulla’ junction in Colombo. Perhaps the more perceptive of us might have glanced at the mosaic in the entrance and wondered what it meant. For one of the smallest communities in the country, the Dutch Burghers have stamped quite the imprint and its reverberations are felt even today. They adapted to this country in a wholehearted manner. It is markedly different from the way that people of Dutch origin carried out their lives elsewhere. In South Africa for instance, to this day the Dutch culture is present mainly through the Afrikaans language. In contrast, the Dutch Burghers of Sri Lanka have not had the same affinity with the Netherlands. The article compiled by Michiel Baas covers much of the evolution of the community and the manner in which their endeavors were discharged.

I shall desist from discoursing too much further on the upcoming journal. It is already being printed as these words are written. I know for a fact that it’s most loyal readers are already counting the days until they get their hands on the latest issue. The less invested are also awaiting it’s arrival quite eagerly. As for those who still haven’t read the former volumes, this might be your chance to join an exclusive readership. The Ceylon Journal is a treasure trove of information. Reserving your copy is just a simple Google search away!!

India’s federalist check, America’s unitary President, and postcolonial Britain’s powerless PM

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.