Let’s understand what a masterpiece is and how it originated

We watch movies and serials of different genres, we all read books, both fiction and nonfiction, and we try to read paintings. A certain part of the day most of us spend our time on Facebook, YouTube, Instagram, Wattpad, or TikTok watching or reading the contents. Whenever we come across something unusual, of course rich in creativity, on those platforms, we generally used to call or comment on them as ‘truly a masterpiece,’ ‘incredible work,’ or ‘great job,’ etc.

In a general sense, why would we call something a  ‘MASTERPIECE’?

A YouTube video or an Insta reel with eye-catching content, also overlaid with a rhythmic melody or adorned with a beautiful voiceover we pass a comment saying it’s ‘a masterpiece’ because we enjoyed the content.

Sometimes a mother appreciates a piece of drawing made by her five-year-old kid by calling it ‘a masterpiece.’ Because she admires the work by her child. So, we call a work of art in any context ‘a masterpiece’ to admire the content.

On another occasion we watch a movie or read a novel with a heart-wrenching plot. And we empathise with the characters we met in those plots. We sometimes build strong emotional connections with the characters we find, and we see ourselves mirrored. So, at the end we commend the movie or the fiction as ‘a masterpiece.’ Because the plot and the characters could resonate with the emotions of the viewer or the reader. When a work of art is capable of evoking empathy in us, we unhesitatingly call it ‘a masterpiece.’

In the modern context any work of art that is enjoyed, admired, and felt deeply by the viewer or the reader could be a Masterpiece.

Is the term ‘masterpiece’ as simple as it sounds? No. It isn’t.

Does this term connote a much deeper and broader meaning? Yes, it does.

All forms of art begin with an ‘image’ conceived in the human mind.

The mental process that combines each image conceived in the mind, giving birth to a new idea, is called ‘imagination.’

The humans are gifted with the exceptional capacity of converting their imagination into visual, verbal, written, gestural, and melodic forms, which ultimately manifested as ‘Arts.’

Therefore, undoubtedly, imagination is the cornerstone of all forms of art.

The most important element that helps imagination to express itself through the mediums of visuals, words, texts, gestures, or sounds is  creativity. The idea conceived in the mind or what is imagined cannot be embodied without creativity.

Claude Monet’s Impression Sunrise – National Gallery of Art in Washington DC

Picasso’s Bulls head (33.5 x 43.5 x 19 cm), Musée Picasso, Paris

All humans and animals on earth are born with creativity. At the onset, both species, humans and animals, harness creativity for their survival.

Animals’ creativity is propelled by their instincts, while human creativity is sparked by imagination.

Any work of art is the physical form of the mental process called imagination, manifested through creativity.

Lee. A. Jacobus, F. David Martin, in their book ‘The Humanities through The Arts,’ recognise three criteria for determining something a work of art.

2. The object or the event should be intended to be a work of art by its maker.

3. The important and recognised ‘experts’ agree that it is a work of art.

We all are in some way or another. Some sing, however, on pitch or off pitch; some write poems when they are free; some sketch something on a piece of paper and say ‘painting is their hobby,’ and some autofocus their cameras and capture something and say photography is their pastime. All leisurely artistic practices are performed with a simple utility rather than a profound artistic expression.

A great artist is someone who expresses his or her thoughts, ideas, feelings, and perspectives through various artistic mediums in a unique, authentic, and unparalleled way with an intention and purpose that extends beyond simple utility. The originality of their work not only enthralls the audiences but also sets precedent and acts as an inspiring agent for generations to come.

There is no accidental or random art. Every work of art is the physical extension of the artist’s mind, which is driven by an intention and a purpose.

The artist’s intention is to express deeper insights through the medium of arts. And the purpose is self-discovery.

An artist never creates anything with no intention. This intention of the artist is instrumental in building up the entire composition. The ‘intention’ of a great artist is always associated with their life circumstances, personal opinions, experiences, beliefs, ideologies, and emotions. All these aspects are encapsulated in profound artistic expressions.

So “art” is definitively a subjective statement. Artists develop through fascinations as well as frustrations. Some of the most fabulous works of art were born in much tormented minds plagued by disappointments, distress, and despair. In this way all works of art reflect the artist’s mind. In other words, they imbue their life into their work. That is why every great work of art is brimming with life and full of emotions.

Let’s take Michelangelo for an example. The face of the Virgin Mary of Pieta, the face of ‘David,’ and the face of ‘Moses’ are full of life and full of emotions.

Whenever I see those faces, I try to read Michelangelo’s extraordinary artistic mind. I read the gestures of those sculptures. And try to understand what the artist really wanted to convey through those gestures. Whenever I look at Michelangelo’s or any other great artist’s masterpieces, I think about the mind that breathed life into the lifeless marble blocks.

Great artists do not create art for everyone. Whatever they create is for themselves or for someone who is much closer to them. They are not on the path of pleasing everyone with their work. No great artist has expectations to rise as high as the sky; instead, they go deeper. They touch their inner being, and with imagination and creativity, they bring ‘the self’ to the outer surface. The more subjective it is, the more universal it becomes.

Great artists or masters never look for instant fame or validation. When recognised ‘experts’ as well as the public embrace their work in the course of time, fame and validation come looking for the artist. The recognised ‘experts’ are referred to as art historians, connoisseurs, curators, and art critics. Their observations and judgments are universally accepted in determining the status of a work of art.

Sarath Chandrajeewa’s Motion and stillness 2023 (Height 150cm, Bronze mounted on wooden structure) – Ayuda Centre of Healing, Thalahena, Sri Lanka

To understand this, let’s look into the historic evolution of the term ‘masterpiece.’

The term ‘masterpiece’ first appeared in the medieval French documents in the 13th century.

This term was initially described as ‘Chef d’oeuvre’ in French and later translated to English as ‘Chief Work.’

This was primarily associated with ‘craft guilds’ in medieval Europe.

A ‘craft guild’ is a professional association for craftsmen who practiced a particular skill or craft.

European guilds started to form when the size of the towns began to expand in the 10th century.

Prior to the formation of guilds, merchants simply wandered from town to town and sold their goods in whatever market existed.

With the expansion of craft guilds, new members were trained and enrolled in the guilds through a hierarchical system.

Then comes the journeyman, and the master is placed on the topmost level.

A young person was to apprentice for a master for several years, working under him without being paid.

After certain skills are acquired, the apprenticeship comes to an end.

As the next step in the hierarchy, the apprentice becomes a journeyman and continues to work for the master for wages.

The goal of the journeyman was to eventually become a master.

Proving their competency, skill, and craftsmanship, it was compulsory for a journeyman to present a ‘masterpiece.’

Therefore, a masterpiece served as proof of a piece of a very high standard created by a journeyman demonstrating their craftsmanship and competence in order to gain the position as a master.

The ‘Masterpiece’ submitted by a journeyman was finally evaluated by the craft guild.

If the guild were to approve the ‘masterpiece’ presented by the journeyman, he would be elevated to the position of ‘Master.’

After becoming a ‘master,’ he is allowed to open his own workshop in line with the regulations by the Guild.

On an occasion where a journeyman’s masterpiece was rejected by the guild, he got no second chance to resubmit the work.

Crafts in which people could become masters were goldsmithing, blacksmithing, weaving, cobbling, carpentry, painting, sculpture, and confectionery-making.

Florence was said to have 21 guilds of this nature in the mid-14th century.

With the development of the Renaissance in the 14th and 15th centuries, painting and sculpture were considered art rather than a trade or a craft.

In Renaissance art and culture were largely dominated by elites who became the major patrons of art.

With all these transformations, a high degree of classical value was attributed to artistic creations.

And at the same time, requirements concerning masterpieces also shifted.

The technical mastery or high degree of craftsmanship was not sufficient for an artist to flourish.

Because the works of art needed to showcase not just quality, but exceptional quality.

Giorgio Vasari, who is considered to be the first art historian of Western art history, largely influenced the streamlining of the criteria in defining a masterpiece.

In his book, ‘The Lives of Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors and Architects,’ written in 1550, he created a hierarchy among artists. His aim was to separate the best artist from mediocre artists. What he meant by ‘Best Artist’ here are masters.

In the time of craft guilds, ‘artisans’ were bound by the traditions and rules of the guild.

Every work of art by an ‘artisan’ was presented as a representation of the guild.

In the transition from the medieval ages to the Renaissance, the role of ‘artisan’ shifts to ‘artist.’

The ‘Artist’ was free to explore new styles and personal preferences in art.

They were no longer bound by the traditions, and the freedom of artists was established as a result.

From the 15th century, the liberty and autonomy of the artist have gradually increased up until this day.

The rigorousness of criteria that determined the status and quality of masterpieces was also relaxed in the course of time.

That is how the term ‘masterpiece’ appears much oversimplified and has become one of the most overused terms in modern discourses of art.

There is another word that goes in parallel to ‘masterpiece.’

This word is derived from Latin and translated to English as ‘Great Work.’

Magnum Opus is the ‘top moment’ of one’s artistic journey. Or it is an artist’s greatest, most influential, and most significant piece of art.

A magnum opus by an artist is undoubtedly a masterpiece, while a masterpiece by an artist could not have been his or her ‘magnum opus.’

On the contrary, there are some artists whose numerous works of art are considered to be masterpieces, yet their topmost work, or the magnum opus, remains undefinable. (To be concluded)

Venue: Sri Lanka Archive of Contemporary Art, Architecture and Design, Jaffna.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.