Japan extends support for humanitarian demining activities in Northern Province

On 30 October 2025, Ambassador of Japan to Sri Lanka Akio Isomata, signed a grant contract for a demining project under the scheme of “Grant Assistance for Grassroots Human Security Projects (GGP),” with Skavita Humanitarian Assistance and Relief Project (SHARP) Program Manager Sarath Jayawardhana.

The Government of Japan has provided $ 477,185 (approx. Rs. 144 million) for the project, which will be implemented by SHARP, to support its humanitarian demining activities in the Northern Province of Sri Lanka. Under this new project, more than 180,000 m2 of land is expected to be made mine-free, allowing approx. 600 people to return to the land and approx. 1,500 people in the surrounding areas to expand their economic activities. Japan has been a major donor in demining activities in Sri Lanka since 2002, and the total assistance amounts to over $ 48 million.

Expressing deepest gratitude to SHARP for its dedication and untiring efforts, and reiterating Japan’s commitment to continued assistance, Ambassador Isomata said: “During President Disanayake’s visit to Japan last month, President expressed appreciation for Japan’s continued assistance in demining activities in Sri Lanka, recognising the assistance as impacting positively towards national reconciliation, and supporting community empowerment and post-conflict development in the North and East. Japan appreciates these kind words of recognition extended by the President. In the summit meeting between the two leaders in Tokyo, both sides also affirmed the importance of addressing socio-economic challenges of conflict-affected communities in the North and East. Bearing in mind that national reconciliation and socio-economic development are closely interconnected, the Japanese side reaffirmed its commitment to continuing its support for the development of the Northern and Eastern Provinces.”

SHARP Program Manager Sarath Jayawardhana said, “SHARP will continue to carry out our operations to the best of our ability diligently, efficiently and effectively. I wish to convey the heartfelt gratitude and appreciation of all members of SHARP to Ambassador Akio Isomata, all GGP and other staff members of the Embassy of Japan for their unstinted support by sponsoring SHARP for another year, and more so ever for the Embassy of Japan being in the forefront of demining activities in Sri Lanka and their continuous concern and assistance for the well-being of the people of our country. We in SHARP are also very grateful most of all to the people of Japan.”