Korea celebrates National Foundation Day and 48 years of Korea–Sri Lanka Friendship

The Embassy of the Republic of Korea in Sri Lanka, led by Ambassador Miyon Lee, hosted a grand celebration to mark Korea’s 4358th National Foundation Day at Cinnamon Life, Colombo. This year’s celebration also commemorated the 48th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Korea and Sri Lanka, highlighting the deepening friendship and multifaceted cooperation between the two nations.

The occasion was graced by several distinguished guests, including Hon. Saroja Savithri Paulraj, the Minister of Women and Child Affairs, who attended as the Chief Guest. Also in attendance were Cabinet Ministers, Ministry Secretaries, Ambassadors, Korean nationals, and representatives from diverse sectors of Sri Lankan society, all of whom have contributed to the ongoing partnership between Korea and Sri Lanka.

In her opening address, Ambassador Miyon Lee warmly welcomed the guests and emphasized the deep historical and cultural significance of National Foundation Day for the Korean people. She highlighted Korea’s journey from its ancient roots to its modern achievements, underscoring the nation’s commitment to democracy, global peace andprosperity.

Ambassador Lee also reflected on the evolving bilateral relationship between Korea and Sri Lanka, particularly through Korea’s Official Development Assistance (ODA) programs. She spotlighted several key collaborations over the past year and outlined Korea’s new phase of soft power diplomacy with focus on “K-Initiative” aimed at promoting K-pop, K-dramas, Kmovies, K-beauty, and even K-technology to reach beyond Korea and across the globe.

Special mention was made of KOICA (Korea International Cooperation Agency), the lead organization implementing Korea’s ODA in Sri Lanka. The Ambassador congratulated KOICA on its 30th anniversary in Sri Lanka, recognizing its enduring presence and dedicated service across multiple sectors.

Minister Saroja Savithri Paulraj, in her keynote address extended heartfelt congratulations on the occasion of Korea’s National Day and commended the Korean government for its generous support through Korea’s Official Development Assistance (ODA).

Korea Celebrates National Foundation Day and 48 Years of Korea–Sri Lanka Friendship She acknowledged the significant contributions of Korean ODA to key sectors in Sri Lanka including education, transportation, tourism, technology, water management, and rural development, which have played a vital role in the country’s socio-economic progress.

Emphasizing on the role of Sri Lanka’s migrant labour force in Korea, she stated that over 30,000 Sri Lankan migrant workers are employed in Korea under the Employment Permit System (EPS) and thanked the Republic of Korea for its commitment towards the well-being of the Sri Lankan community.

The Minister further noted that as Korea and Sri Lanka mark 48 years of diplomatic relations this year, she is confident that the strengthening ties between the two nations will continue to advance their comprehensive bilateral agenda and foster deeper collaboration in multilateral fora.

This year’s National Foundation Day celebration offered a unique sensory experience, showcasing the essence of Korean traditional culture, wellness and culinary artistry. Themed around “K-initiative” and showcasing K-beauty products, the event featured exhibits of Korean cosmetics hosted by the Korea Trade-Investment Promotion Agency (KOTRA) — showcasing Korea’s global influence in skincare and wellness. Additionally, a booth hosted by LG Electronics provided visitors with the chance to experience the latest cutting-edge technology developed in Korea, further underscoring the country’s innovation and cultural pride.

Guests also enjoyed a flavourful Korean culinary experience at the Korea Food Corner, which featured beloved dishes such as Kimbap, Ojingeobokkeum (stir-fried squid), Japchae, Bulgogi, Korean braised chicken, pan-fried zucchini, chive pancakes, and classics like Kimchi and Tteokbokki, all prepared by, Mr. Choi Jae-hyun, a master Korean chef who travelled all the way from Korea for the event. The traditional Korean sweet rice drink, Sikhye, also proved to be crowd favourite, delighted guests with its refreshing taste.

As in previous years, the celebration was made more vibrant by the enthusiastic participation of the Korean community in Sri Lanka. Their strong sense of national identity, unity and pride added warmth to the event. Following the official reception and dinner, Ambassador Miyon Lee, dressed in a customized Hanbok specially curated for her by Buddhi Batiks, took the time to engage personally with members of the Korean and Sri Lankan communities, capturing the spirit of togetherness through a commemorative photo session.

John Keells Holdings doubles EBITDA to Rs.18.3Bn, signals even stronger second-half

Adani lessons cited: Chamber demands financial acumen in PPP negotiations

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.