A single swallow wheeling in a gyre

NPP MP and former Speaker Asoka Ranwala was arrested yesterday over a road accident, where an infant and two women were injured, in Sapugaskanda. He has been charged with dangerous driving and failure to prevent an accident, according to media reports quoting the police. He was in the National Hospital of Sri Lanka, Colombo, at the time of going to press. An attempt is being made in some quarters to have the public believe that the law applies to everyone equally under the current dispensation, but it is said that one swallow does not make a summer.

The police have apparently acted the way they should, where the accident allegedly caused by Ranwala is concerned, but they ought to explain why they baulked at arresting a deputy minister and an NPP mayor facing a fraud charge, and went out of their way to consult the Attorney General instead to buy time. They swiftly arrest Opposition politicians and haul them before courts in double-quick time, don’t they?

One may recall that former Senior DIG Ravi Seneviratne was arrested in 2023 for drunk driving and causing a multiple vehicle collision in Colombo. Thereafter, he joined the NPP’s Retired Police Collective as its head, and had himself appointed Secretary to the Ministry of Public Security, after the NPP’s rise to power, the following year. Now, the drunk driving charge against him has been dropped, according to media reports! This is proof that political interference with the Attorney General’s Department is far from over, and the rule of law is yet to be restored. The police remain putty in the hands of the ruling party politicians, and the Executive is keeping the AG’s Department under his thumb.

Hundreds of JVP supporters broke their journey on the Southern Expressway, of all places, on their way to their party’s May Day rally this year. Several buses carrying them were seen parked in undesignated areas of the expressway in full view of the police. It will be interesting to know if the police have prosecuted those offenders.

The national anti-graft commission and the CID have come under criticism for dragging their feet on complaints against the NPP politicians and their cronies while going hell for leather to arrest and prosecute the political rivals of the current administration. No government politician has been questioned on the controversial release of 323 red-flagged containers via the green channel in the Colombo Port in January 2025. What those containers carried is anybody’s guess.

In September, a group of JVP activists stormed a Frontline Socialist Party (FSP) office in Yakkala. The police shamelessly sided with the JVP members, who produced a document, claiming that it was a court order, vesting the place in their party. The police accepted their claim unquestioningly and drove the FSP members away. They went on to put up barricades in the area to prevent the FSP from trying to reclaim their office seized by the JVP. We argued in a previous editorial comment that it was a clear instance of the police misusing state resources to safeguard the interests of the government.

A few days later, Gampaha Additional Magistrate Dhammika Uduwe Withana directed the Yakkala Police to evict all those who were occupying the FSP office and to hold the premises under police custody pending the Gampaha District Court ruling on its ownership.

One should not be so naïve as to take the wheeling of a single swallow in a gyre as a sign of the arrival of summer.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.