’High risk’ of lake breaching and causing second flood, warns China

BBC - China has warned there is a "high risk" that a lake which formed after the recent landslide near the Nepal-Tibet border may breach its banks, causing a second flood downstream.

The warning comes after Wednesday's deadly flash flood in the same area which scientists say was triggered by the collapse of a mountain glacier into a river.

As of Friday morning, an estimated 2.5 million cubic metres of water had accumulated at the barrier lake, according to state broadcaster CCTV. A barrier lake is a body of water formed when debris dams up a river.

Officials said that three million cubic metres of water is expected to flow into the lake between Thursday and the weekend, posing a "high risk of breach".

The barrier lake, which formed at the confluence of the Chhochen Khola and Purepu Tsangpo rivers, has already started to overflow, according to China's Ministry of Water Resources. The area has also seen heavy rain.

Authorities have sent engineering teams to monitor the lake's water levels and the atmospheric conditions.

A CCTV report on Friday morning said that most of the Chinese emergency services were stuck at a village about 7km (4 miles) from Gyirong Port, the major land crossing linking Nepal and China which was hit by Wednesday's massive flood.

This was because the barrier lake was "overflowing non-stop" which could lead to fresh floods or debris flows.

Due to the risks, search and rescue operations had to be suspended near the Nepal-Tibet border, according to the report.

The lake is in the same region as the Langtang Lirung peak, where the collapsed glacier is believed to have originated, and several kilometres upstream from Gyirong Port.

Separately, Nepali authorities have warned of the risk of blockages causing further floods along the Bhote Koshi and Trishuli rivers.

They have warned people to stay away from the rivers until further notice.

Scientists have said that the flood on Wednesday was likely to have been caused by part of a glacier near Langtang Lirung collapsing into the river below, which in turn caused a massive surge downstream carrying water and debris.

Several hundred people have died in Nepal and with hundreds more still missing after the flash flood. On the Tibet side of the border alone, more than 550 are missing - nearly half of which are foreigners.