EY GDS Sri Lanka expands Colombo footprint with new office at WTC

From left: Gayathri Manatunga – Managing Partner for EY Sri Lanka & Maldives, Manesh Patel – EY GDS Global Operations Leader, Sam Rajapaksa – EY GDS Sri Lanka Consulting and Location Leader

EY Global Delivery Services (EY GDS) Sri Lanka, one of the nation’s fastest-growing global capabilities centers with a focus on consulting services, continues its growth journey with the inauguration of a new office on level 22 of the World Trade Center East Tower on 1 September.

The new office expands the existing footprint of EY GDS Sri Lanka at the World Trade Center by an additional floorlevel, bringing the total presence at the location to three levels, along with the two existing floors.The new facility was inaugurated by EY GDS Global Operations Leader Manesh Patel, who was joined by members of the EY GDS leadership team.

The expansion of EY GDS Sri Lanka’s Colombo operations supports the organization’s continued growth and strengthens its delivery capabilities across key service areas, including technology, business, risk consulting and assurance. It adds capacity for 110 additional workstations and follows the organization surpassing the milestone of 500 professionals in the location in recent months.

The new space is complemented by a newly refurbished cybersecurity center on level 20, providing a dedicated, fully equipped facility to support EY GDS Sri Lanka’s growing cyber capabilities. Together, the two spaces represent a significant investment in the organization’s growing footprint in Colombo, with EY GDS Sri Lanka targeting a doubling of its workforce by 2027.

Manesh Patel, EY GDS Global Operations Leader, said, “This expansion in Colombo is a testament to the strong growth of EY GDS Sri Lanka and our confidence in the exceptional talent based here. It strengthens our ability to scale key capabilities while continuing to provide a collaborative environment for our people to thrive.”

Sam Rajapaksa, EY GDS Sri Lanka Consulting and Location Leader, added, “The expansion of EY GDS Sri Lanka’s Colombo operations is a broader commitment and statement of intent about where we see Sri Lanka’s role within the global EY organization’s operations. As we work toward doubling the workforce by 2027, investments such as level 22 and the new cybersecurity center offer our people the environment needed to grow and provide Sri Lanka a stronger footing as a regional technology and delivery hub.”

The expansion in Colombo further reinforces Sri Lanka’s growing position as a regional hub for technology and cybersecurity services, supporting employment creation and reflecting the EY organization’s continued confidence in the country as a strategic talent and delivery location.It comes at a time when Sri Lanka’s technology and business services sector is drawing increasing international attention, with global organizations expanding their presence in the country to tap into its skilled workforce.