AIA Insurance Lanka announces Healthiest Schools competition winners

AIA Insurance Lanka recently announced the winners of AIA Healthiest Schools Programme 2026, recognising the outstanding schools from across Sri Lanka for their exceptional efforts in promoting holistic student well-being.

Now in its second year in Sri Lanka, the AIA Healthiest Schools Programme has grown into a leading national platform dedicated to advancing health and well-being among students, empowering schools to drive meaningful change through initiatives aligned to four key pillars: healthy eating, active lifestyles, mental well-being and health and sustainability.

Endorsed by the Education Ministry, the 2025/26 edition of AIA Healthiest Schools Programme officially attracted a record number of submissions, reflecting the growing enthusiasm among schools to place student health and well-being at the heart of education.

A panel of distinguished judges evaluated the submissions and selected the winning schools based on the impact, innovation and sustainability of their projects.

Among the participants, A/Mankadawala Maha Vidyalaya emerged as the Winner in the Primary School Category. Unagaswela Primary School secured the First Runner-Up position, while Subharathi Mahamathya Maha Vidyalaya was recognised as the Second Runner-up and MR/Hemachandra Maha Vidyalaya was awarded Third Runner-up.

In the Secondary School Category, WP/MT/Nauththuduwa Maha Vidyalaya emerged as the Winner, while G/Amugoda Maha Vidyalaya was named First Runner-up. Jaffna Hindu College secured the Second Runner-up position and Ku/Yatiwala Sri Gunananda Vidyalaya received the Third Runner-up award.

In addition to national recognition, the winning schools collectively received prize money worth US $ 75,000 to further enhance and expand their health and well-being initiatives, enabling them to create an even greater impact within their school communities.

The ceremony was graced by chief guest VP/Secretary to Prime Minister Karunaratne Bandara, alongside Insurance Regulatory Commission of Sri Lanka (IRCSL) Director General Damayanthi Fernando and IRCSL Director Market Development and External Relations Deepika Nawarathna.

Representing AIA Insurance were Director and Chief Executive Officer Chathuri Munaweera and other senior management representatives.

AIA Insurance Lanka Chief Marketing Officer Sasith Bambaradeniya said, “Healthy habits formed during childhood lay the foundation for healthier futures. AIA Healthiest Schools Programme was launched to empower schools to become catalysts for positive change. We are inspired by the energy demonstrated by students and educators across Sri Lanka and we congratulate all the winning schools for setting an outstanding example.”