Expired dengue kits in use?

Colombo, Aug. 3 (Daily Mirror) - In a backdrop where the dengue epidemic has claimed over 60lives, speculation is rife as to whether private medical institutions are forced to use expired diagnostic devices such as dengue NS1 antigen kits due to lack of regulations and standards.

Back in 2017, the then government introduced a price ceiling for full blood count tests at Rs. 250 and dengue NS1 antigen tests at Rs. 1000. In 2020, the Consumer Affairs Authority (CAA) issued a new maximum retail price for full blood count tests at Rs. 400 and dengue NS1 antigen tests at Rs. 1200 as per gazette notification no. 2186/17. Following recent raids conducted by CAA, the Authority clarified that the maximum retail price for full blood count tests and Dengue NS1 antigen tests haven’t changed since 2020 and that action would be taken against any medical institution charging patients beyond these price limits.

According to Private Health Services Regulatory Council (PHSRC) secretary Dr. Priyantha Tennakoon, the Council has been established under the Private Medical Institutions (Regulations) Act No. 21 of 2006. He said that all private medical institutions should maintain their own standards and that standards vary according to different institutions.

“For the past 20 years we haven’t set standards that are suitable for Sri Lanka,” he told Daily Mirror. “Most private hospitals and laboratories have been accredited under the Sri Lanka Accreditation Board (SLAB) or have maintained international standards. So we don’t see the need to create a different set of standards. There are different standards for the healthcare sector such as Joint Commission International (JCI), Accreditation Commission for Health Care (ACHC) and so on. Hospitals can choose an accreditation system of their choice and obtain certificates,” he said.

Dr. Tennakoon said that according to these standards,hospitals and laboratories should carry out waste management, take necessary action regarding expiry dates of diagnostics devices and so on. “The accreditation process requires them to abide by these standards and it is only afterwards that a certificate is being issued. The PHSRC doesn’t re-evaluate these standards because we still don’t have that facility. There’s an ongoing court case regarding accreditation gradings and charges since 2018. So, until the judgement is being issued we cannot go ahead with issuing accreditations to private medical institutions,” he noted.

In Sri Lanka, obtaining accreditation for private medical institutions is a voluntary practice. However, Dr. Tennekoon pointed out that no laboratory could use expired diagnostic test kits or reagent. “Right now we cannot carry out monitoring regarding expired test kits as we don’t have a proper work force. The authorized officer is the provincial health services director and according to the Act he should inspect laboratories in his respective province and submit a report. There are certain human resource and technical issues,” he further said.

Dr. Tennakoon said that even though the PHSRC has beennamed as the regulatory authority they still don’t have the necessary infrastructure to expedite regulations. “We have submitted gazette notifications for approval but for the past 10 years we haven’t received approval yet,” he added.

In his comments, National Medicines Regulatory Authority (NMRA) Chairman Dr. Ananda Wijewickrama said that the NMRA also carries out random monitoring from time to time and that the standard is the expiry date. He said that even if the dengue antigen test reads negative, patients will be recorded as suspected cases given the scenario these days. “It is not only the dengue antigen test results that we obtain to determine whether a patient is having dengue. We take a full blood count and also observe their clinical features as well,” he added

Sri Lanka Dengue Cases 2026: Live Tracker and Latest Updates

CAA fines 23 private hospitals, labs Rs. 5.8m over expired medicines

Spotlight on standards of private medical laboratories and patients’ safety