Foreign funding and private donations for CIABOC

The Director General of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC) announced last month that amendments to the Anti-Corruption Act of 2023 were on the cards so as to restrict public access to the assets and liabilities declarations filed with the Commission. The information, released in 2025, caused profound embarrassment to the present government, but was received very well by the public and any attempt to restrict that information flow at this stage, may prove to be very unpopular.

The popular demand now would be that organisational entities, like political parties and trade unions, also be required to file assets and liabilities declarations with the CIABOC, instead of just the individuals holding positions in such bodies.

Be that as it may, there are some serious issues that need to be rectified in the Anti-Corruption Act of 2023. Foremost among them is Section 31(4) (b) which states that the fund of the CIABOC can receive money “by way of donations, gifts, bequests, or grants from any source whatsoever, whether within or outside Sri Lanka, subject to the approval of the Minister assigned the subject of Finance.”

Those who would be motivated to give gifts and donations to a body like the CIABOC would only be those who want to influence it in some manner to achieve a collateral purpose. While the English version of the Anti-Corruption Act states that the CIABOC can receive such funds “from any source whatsoever whether within or outside Sri Lanka”, the Sinhala version of the Act has sought to disguise that intention by using more opaque wording which goes as: “Sri Lankawa thula ho Sri Lankawen pitatha pihiti yam mulashrayakin”.

The English “any source whatsoever” has been diluted in the Sinhala version by the use of the phrase “yam mulashrayakin” which roughly translates as ‘from a certain source’. When the Sinhala word ‘yam’ is used and nothing more is specified, in practice it becomes “any source whatsoever”! The difference in the way Section 31(4) (b) has been worded in the English and the Sinhala versions of the Anti-Corruption Act of 2023 clearly reveals the villainous intention behind this provision.

Giving the Finance Minister a say in approving such donations gives an incumbent Finance Minister undue leverage over the Commission. We must be mindful of the fact that the Finance portfolio has often been held by the President.

Section 31(6) of the Anti-Corruption Act states that the source and purpose of such foreign and local private donations have to be made public by the Commission, within one month. However, even if funding is received openly, that does not mean that such funding is given without a collateral purpose. Journalists, like Shamindra Ferdinando, and Malinda Seneviratne, have taken up cudgels in the past about foreign interested parties, like USAID openly funding organisations, such as the Bar Association of Sri Lanka, and certain associations of journalists. Does anyone remember what President Donald Trump said about the activities of USAID? A law enforcement agency, like the CIABOC, should never be left open to the contagion of private funding by local and foreign interested parties.

India imposes strict limitations on all Indian citizens with regard to the receipt of foreign funds under the Foreign Contributions (Regulation) Act of 2010. These limitations apply to politicians at all levels of government, judges, public servants and even journalists, cartoonists and political activists. The Indian restrictions apply not only to money or property but even to foreign trips and other forms of foreign-funded hospitality.

India would never allow its premier anti-corruption law enforcement body to directly receive funding from abroad or from private donors within India. The Indian anti-corruption body that corresponds to Sri Lanka’s CIABOC is the Central Vigilance Commission of India. Section 13 of the Indian Central Vigilance Commission Act of 2003 states that all expenses of the Commission will be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. In Sri Lanka, too, all expenses of the CIABOC should be a charge on the Consolidated fund of Sri Lanka.

Because of the enormous power that it wields over the lives of all politicians, public servants, and judicial officers in Sri Lanka, the receipt of foreign funding or private donations by the CIABOC impacts negatively on the national interest and even the sovereignty of Sri Lanka. The power of the CIABOC is such that it’s like the Police Department, Attorney General’s Department, parts of the judiciary and the executive presidency all rolled into one. Sections 32 to 72 of the Anti-Corruption Act outlines the wide ranging powers wielded by the CIABOC.

The CIABOC has complete and total control over their officers and employees. The appointment, salaries, conditions of service, promotion, disciplinary control and dismissal of their employees is handled entirely by the Commission itself. In contrast to this, such matters with regard to the Police, the Attorney General’s Department and the Judiciary are handled by the National Police Commission, the Public service Commission and the Judicial Services Commission, respectively. The checks and balances that apply to other law enforcement entities do not apply to the CIABOC.

The CIABOC can recruit staff from other parts of the public service (which includes the Police Department). However, the police officers taken into the Commission do not function under the IGP but under the authority of the Commission which effectively gives the CIABoC its own police force. Authorised officers of the CIABOC can manhandle and arrest suspects without an order from a Magistrate, enter and search any premises, or vehicle, seize any article deemed necessary for their investigations and use force if necessary in carrying out these functions. They can carry out undercover operations and use bugging devices.

The Commission can summon any person and examine him on oath or affirmation; obtain details of transactions and accounts from banks, obtain information from the Inland Revenue Department, freeze bank accounts, order the Controller of Immigration and Emigration to impound passports. With the sanction of a Magistrate the CIABOC can direct any person to unlock or unencrypt digital devices and intercept messages. Following such investigations, the CIABOC can institute criminal proceedings against the persons concerned in the Magistrate’s Court or the High Court.

Under Sections 67 and 71, the CIABOC can withdraw or defer the indictment against the accused after taking into account considerations such as the national interest and public interest; the views of the victims of the offence; and representations that may be made by the accused person or his lawyer. In withdrawing such indictments, the CIABOC may impose on the accused conditions such as publicly expressing remorse and apology before the High Court, providing reparations to victims of the offence, publicly pledging to refrain from committing further offences or to permanently refrain from holding elected or appointed public office.

Thus, we see that the CIABOC controls the entire gamut of law enforcement in relation to offences coming within its purview. From manhandling and arresting suspects, obtaining statements under oath, seizing documents and other goods, searching premises, freezing bank accounts, impounding passports, to conducting criminal prosecutions in Magistrate’s Courts and High Courts, and even granting clemency to accused individuals, the Commission controls the entire process.

No single institution, whether it be the Police Department, the Attorney General’s Department, the Judiciary or the Executive Presidency, wields such extensive power over the lives of key government functionaries, public servants, judges and ordinary citizens. Even the President’s power to pardon offenders is restricted in so many ways. However, the Commission can grant clemency to anyone facing legal proceedings on nothing more than the representations made by the alleged offender’s lawyer and on the condition of not committing such offences again or agreeing never to hold public office again.

Leaving an exit pathway, such as that envisaged in Section 67 and 71, is a good policy in criminal justice administration, especially when it comes to bringing to a conclusion cases with many grey areas. Hence, we do not question the power conferred on the CIABOC to grant clemency under Sections 67 and 71. However this provision, when taken together with the other powers of the Commission, immeasurably increases its power. In the hands of the wrong people, the powers of the CIABOC can be used to pressurize and remove targeted individuals from public life.

Any foreign or local interested party that provides private donations to the CIABOC, under Section 31(4) (b) of the Anti-Corruption Act, will in effect be buying influence over Sri Lanka’s most powerful law enforcement agency.

In 2010, over half a million US Dollars in cash was found in the possession of a close relative of a candidate at the Presidential election. In December 2014, foreign currency totaling well over one million USD was discovered in the possession of a relative of another presidential candidate. In more recent times, many media personalities have commented on the manner in which the 2025 assets and liabilities declarations of certain government figures reveal large inflows of cash in 2022 – the regime change year.

Against such a backdrop, allowing an all-powerful law enforcement agency, like the CIABOC, to accept donations from foreign and local interested parties, can hardly be in the public interest. Hence, Section 31(4) (b) of the Anti-Corruption Act should be repealed.

Sri Lankan Airlines Airbus Scandal and the Death of Kapila Chandrasena and my Brother Rajeewa

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.