English proficiency becomes more critical as AI reshapes the workplace: Educationist

Artificial intelligence is reshaping the way people access information, learn and communicate. Yet, as technology continues to advance, the ability to think critically, make informed judgments, understand context and communicate ideas effectively is becoming even more important. While AI tools can support learning and improve written communication, they cannot replace the confidence and human ability required to express ideas, collaborate across cultures and build meaningful connections. This has placed renewed attention on the importance of language proficiency and communication skills as key factors for employability and career growth.

According to Arun Rajamani, Cambridge University Press & Assessment South Asia Managing Director, the rise of AI has amplified rather than reduced the need for strong language skills. Drawing on more than three decades of experience across technology, education, manufacturing and transformation, Rajamani highlights why English proficiency, confidence in communication and the ability to apply language skills effectively will remain critical in an AI-driven world. He also discusses how assessments and AI-enabled tools can support learners in developing practical communication needed for employability and career growth.

Rajamani, who serves on Cambridge University Press & Assessment’s Executive Board as the only member from outside the UK, also highlights why communication skills must be developed as lifelong beginning from the early stages of education and continuing throughout an individual’s career.

Q Given the growing role of AI, do you think AI is reducing the importance of English skills, or does it actually make language proficiency more critical?

AI is actually amplifying the need for language skills today. AI tools provide easy access to knowledge, but the ability to think critically, make sound judgments, understand cultural contexts, and effectively communicate ideas become even more important in the age of AI. Therefore, I believe language proficiency needs to be much more developed among people today than ever before.

I often use this example of calculators; before calculators were invented, mental mathematics was what ruled, and that led to the strengthening of numeracy skills. If you look at our grandparents, they could compute very easily. When given numbers and large calculations, they could work them mentally. But when calculators came into being, people started questioning the needed to memorise numbers and tables when they could simply rely on a tool that provided easy access. What did that lead to? It led to an erosion of the ability to do mental mathematics.

I think AI is at a similar point today. The question is whether these tools, by making access to language easier, will deplete people’s ability to communicate effectively or augment it. Certainly, in the case of written communication, AI can help people to refine their writing and become more effective in communicating their ideas on paper. But when it comes to verbal communication, where people express their thoughts and ideas, AI is not going to do that very effectively. That is when you realise the need for strong language skills becoming even greater.

Q  While most students recognise the importance of English proficiency for employability, a confidence gap remains, with many hesitating to use the language. Can AI tools help bridge this gap and support learners in developing their language skills?

Yes, to your point, I think certainly all these tools, any technology, can be an excellent aid to learning. Today, there are very good proven instances where AI tools are good for people to practise speaking skills. They are very good for practising writing skills, listening skills, and even understanding phonetic impact and accents. So, AI tools can provide a lot of that assisted learning, and therefore there are merits of using AI in the right way. But what it cannot do, or should not do, is replace genuine learning and language augmentation from a skills perspective. That is not something that should be happening.

Q  Given the strong link between communication skills and employability, is strengthening communication ability a key focus for Cambridge, particularly in preparing students for the workforce?

Absolutely. We see a very strong link between communication skills and employability. We have conducted several surveys, including one very recently where we covered a number of students in schools as well as higher education institutions. A majority of the students said that their level of confidence in communicating effectively could actually affect their opportunities in the job market. So, confidence in communication and employability are two very closely related parameters. Therefore, I think it is important to enable today’s graduates and students with the right communication skills so that they feel more confident and are able to express their ideas more effectively during interviews, which is a very significant factor in determining job opportunities.

And it is not only about getting the first job. Good communication skills help people continue to develop throughout their careers. It contributes to enhancing creativity, critical thinking, effective presentations and cultural immersion, all of which are important capabilities for today’s workforce. So, one aspect is being able to enter the workforce, and the other is continuing to strengthen communication skills and becoming more effective as one progresses in their career. There is a very strong linkage between communication effectiveness, employability and long-term career growth opportunities.

Q  What do you think is the biggest challenge students face in developing language skills that can improve their employability?

I think the biggest challenge that students are facing today is the lack of confidence, which emerges from their inability to fully master English as a language. The reason I say that is because English has become the link language for business worldwide. No matter which country you go to today, English is the default language for business.For people who have gained proficiency and are able to communicate effectively across borders, cultural barriers and different geographies, it helps them become much more effective in the global workplace.

We know that countries like Sri Lanka are not creating a workforce that is only going to serve the domestic economy. They are increasingly becoming part of a global workforce.Tourism and hospitality is a great example. Tourism is booming in Sri Lanka, and most tourists coming into the country communicate in English.Therefore, whether it is taxi drivers, front-office staff, people working in back-office operations or those managing banquets, unless they are able to communicate in English, they will not be able to effectively manage guest relations and cater to visitors coming into the country.They are, in many ways, part of a workforce that is serving a global need.

The same applies to other growing industries in Sri Lanka, such as global services and technology, where businesses are now catering to clients across the world. So how do we enable people to succeed? It is only when they have mastered the ability to understand client needs, work with international teams, collaborate across different geographies and communicate effectively, both virtually and physically, that they can truly participate in these opportunities. That is why confidence is one of the key areas we need to develop among students to enable them to succeed in a global context.

Q  How is Cambridge working to address this confidence gap and help students develop the language skills needed to become more employable?

We are doing a lot of work in that area. We have been working with the corporate sector in Sri Lanka and with language training centres to provide the right tools that can not only measure the level of skills students currently have, but also ensure that they receive the right interventions to progress their skills to the next level and become more employable.

One of the things I would like to highlight is that when we think about language, there are four skills that need to be developed in equal measure: listening, speaking, reading and writing. The traditional education system usually develops the art of reading and writing. Reading provides comprehension and understanding, while writing provides us with the ability to express ourselves. However, because of conventional approaches to learning, where a teacher teaches a class, students read, memorise and then write back, these two skills often develop better than the other two skills: listening and speaking.If those skills also need to be developed, we need a way to measure the level of proficiency students currently have and then provide interventions that can help accelerate their development.

So, the first step is ensuring that all four skills are developed equally. The second is using effective interventions based on the assessments we conduct.Cambridge does a lot of work in this area. We work with language training centres that use our assessment tools, which measure English proficiency against global standards. Based on the results students receive after the assessment, we can identify the right interventions, learning resources, classroom environments and practical activities that help them continue developing. At every stage of their learning journey, assessments can show the progress they are making, which also motivates students to continue improving. So, we work with institutions, association bodies and language training centres in Sri Lanka to support the development of language skills and ultimately strengthen employability.

Q  In many education systems, assessments can sometimes lead students to focus on getting through it rather than developing practical language skills. How does Cambridge approach language assessments to ensure that students are able to communicate effectively in real-world situations?

When we think about assessments, we usually think about traditional assessment models where we receive a question paper and have to write answers. But these assessments are not built that way. They are designed to check language proficiency in the way we would normally communicate in our day-to-day lives. Since they are largely digitally led, there are paragraphs provided on screen for students to read, activities based on those readings that require them to write, and speaking tests where they are asked to respond to prompts presented on screen.These are very practical, activity-oriented assessments, to which sufficient preparatory materials are provided. But the test itself is not something where you can simply memorise information and reproduce it.They are not designed to be tough or stressful either. Rather, they assess the same kinds of communication activities that people engage in in their everyday lives. Through this process, the assessment evaluates grammatical accuracy, diction and how effectively someone is able to communicate. These aspects are measured through the assessment software, along with AI-related engines that analyse performance, allowing students to receive a relevant score that reflects their proficiency across the four skills.

Q  Looking ahead, what do you believe is most important for students to focus on in developing language skills that will support their employability and long-term career growth?

In the world of AI, it is extremely important today for students to focus more on developing their language skills.It is important to build confidence among learners so that they are able to find meaningful employment and then continue to strengthen those skills as they progress throughout their careers.

We see a very strong link between assessments and development because assessments allow us to accurately measure language proficiency and design meaningful interventions that are simple, systematic and help students develop their skills. Ultimately, this gives learners the confidence they need.

The other point I would like to highlight is that students often recognise the importance of language skills related to employability only when they enter higher education.While interventions at that stage can certainly help them improve their skills and prepare for job interviews, the real way to ensure that these become lifelong skills is by introducing language development within the school system. When language learning becomes part of the school system, and students are able to progress from one level of proficiency to another from primary through secondary education, those skills become embedded for life.

One of the important areas we are working on in Sri Lanka is partnering with schools to implement language proficiency programmes alongside the regular curriculum. This provides students with the opportunity to build these skills so that by the time they leave school, they already possess the language abilities required for further education and employment. When students combine their ability to master their chosen discipline with the confidence they gain through communication skills, that becomes a very powerful combination for entering the workforce and succeeding in their careers.