Uber Eats expands to Chilaw, Wennappuwa & Puttalam

Uber Eats, Sri Lanka’s most loved delivery app for food, groceries, and more, is now delivering in Chilaw, Wennappuwa, and Puttalam. This expansion further strengthens Uber Eats’ footprint in Sri Lanka and brings greater convenience and economic opportunity to one of Northwestern Province’s most vibrant communities.

For Uber Eats, the expansion reflects its ongoing commitment to empowering local economies by connecting small businesses and delivery partners to a wider customer base through its app. It also gives customers in these fast-growing towns more choice, accessibility, and convenience than ever before and creates new earning opportunities for local residents.

The Northwestern coast is known for its bustling fishing communities and distinctive cuisine ranging from Chilaw’s famous crab curry to Wennappuwa’s street-side kottu and Puttalam’s signature prawn dishes. With Uber Eats, locals can now savour these favourites from trusted neighbourhood restaurants, while visitors exploring the region can enjoy authentic Sri Lankan flavours with just a few taps on the phone.

Varun Wijewardane, Country Manager – Delivery, Uber Sri Lanka, said: “Expanding to Chilaw, Wennappuwa, and Puttalam marks another exciting step in our journey to serve more communities across Sri Lanka. Our goal is to empower local entrepreneurs, merchants, and delivery partners by connecting them to more demand through Uber Eats. We’re proud to bring more choice and convenience to locals and create real economic opportunity in this region.”

The latest launch in the Northwestern Province builds on Uber Eats’ rapid growth across Sri Lanka, following recent expansions to Jaffna, Gampola, Matale, Matara, Weligama, Mirissa, and Anuradhapura this year, and the Southern Coast corridor from Galle to Ahangama in December 2024 – further strengthening Uber Eats’ position as the country’s go-to delivery platform.

Uber Eats allows people to order from local restaurants and grocery stores, and a range of retailers at the touch of a button, and have almost anything from their cooked meals, groceries, electronic items, flowers, beauty products, pet supplies and more delivered reliably and quickly. Since launching in Sri Lanka in 2018, Uber Eats has tapped into Uber’s global technology and logistics expertise to serve multiple cities, and enhance the platform experience with new additions such as same-day delivery of groceries and introduction of sustainable deliveries.

Sri Lanka’s startup ecosystem scales new heights with global validation

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.