From homegrown talent to international diplomacy: CA Sri Lanka’s 46th National Conference concludes on inspiring note

The 46th National Conference of Chartered Accountants of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (CA Sri Lanka) culminated in a powerful finale yesterday, charting the uprise of homegrown talent onto the global stage and the elevation of Sri Lanka’s strategic international role. The third and final day captivated over 2,600 delegates with a series of inspiring sessions, fuelling a forward-looking ambition among the audience.

Friday’s proceedings began with “From Homegrown to World Known: The Journey to Global Recognition,” a session dedicated to the uprise of local brands. The audience was inspired by Miss Sri Lanka 2024 for Miss World and Saheli Foundation Founder Anudi Gunasekara followed by a dynamic panel featuring Santani Wellness Founder and Chief Executive Officer Vickum Nawagamuwage and Carnage Founder Joel Tillekeratne, moderated by Hemas Holdings PLC Group Chief Financial Officer Moiz Rehmanjee. They explored how passion and bold vision can propel Sri Lankan enterprises to international acclaim.

A historic moment unfolded in the fifth session “Pearl in the Indian Ocean: Building Bridges,” where CA Sri Lanka assembled a distinguished panel of diplomats for the first time. The discussion delved into Sri Lanka’s strategic role and the potential for enhanced diplomatic, trade, and cultural partnerships. The esteemed panel included High Commissioner of Bangladesh in Sri Lanka Andalib Elias, High Commissioner of Malaysia to Sri Lanka and the Maldives Badli Hisham Adam, Ambassador of the European Union to Sri Lanka and the Maldives Carmen Moreno, Ambassador of the Republic of Indonesia to Sri Lanka Dewi Gustina Tobing, and Ambassador of the Republic of Türkiye to Sri Lanka and Maldives Semih Lütfü Turgut. The session was moderated by Dhananath Fernando of the Advocata Institute.

The 3-day flagship conference which commenced on 8 October concluded on 10 October 2025 with a creative and impactful segment, “Global Insight >> Local Impact,” featuring a thought-provoking skit by playwright and entertainer Indu Dharmasena, perfectly encapsulating the event’s theme of translating global knowledge into local action.