Scrabble champ’s father describes the making of an icon in the game

Dr. Harshan Lamabadusuriya started his schooling at Richmond College Galle and then spent a couple of years at S. Thomas’ College, Mt. Lavinia and then at Royal College Colombo. When he was at STC, as there was an excellent library, he commenced reading many English books at the expense of his school textbooks. When he was at Royal College, he commenced playing scrabble, represented his school and participated in local tournaments, winning most of those.

As he was not studying, we thought that he would not enter a university and started looking for a coconut estate, so that he could earn a living off the land. On most Sundays my late wife Buddhika and I used to visit the coconut triangle, searching for a suitable estate to purchase. Eventually we purchased one in Kosagama, Weerapokuna, in 1992. Harshan has not visited that estate as yet!

In 1995 I went to England with my family on sabbatical leave for two years and worked as a locum Consultant Paediatrician at the Worthing Hospital in West Sussex. Harshan attended the local Grammar School in Shoreham-by -Sea. He was invited to participate in the very popular TV program on Channel 4 called Countdown and became the runner-up.

At the London A Level examination he obtained five As. Then he entered the Cambridge University for pre-clinical studies and the Oxford University for clinical studies. At present he is working as a Consultant Paediatrician in the Swindon Hospital.

In England he participated in many scrabble tournaments , winning most of those. In 2003, when he was a medical student at the Oxford University, he became the scrabble champion of the UK. His opponent was a 55 year-old British Physicist and he won three-nil.

At the World Scrabble Championship, he became the runner-up. This year he became the National Scrabble Champion of Sri Lanka and more recently he won the UK Open Championship, against participants from all over the world.

At present he is working as a Consultant Paediatrician in the Swindon Hospital.

An adventure at Vadamarachi and warm relations with Gamini Dissanayake

Wijetunga calls a general election and my first time in Parliament

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.