The day the boss mistook me for a peon and took me to an important meeting

Realizing his mistake, Kulasinghe invited me to participate at the meeting despite my role as briefcase carrier

On that particular Monday, my fiance had an early start at Shaw Wallace and Hedges, a private sector firm with its offices about two kilometres south from the State Engineering Corporation SEC, where I worked. Having accompanied her to her workplace, I arrived very early, 6:30 AM, to an open and empty office. There were no hordes of security guards in 1970s and there was an open-door policy at SEC, one could say. A single watcher (as Security Staff were then called) manned the entrance. He greeted me and off I climbed stairs and to my desk. How times have changed in the period to 2020 regards security!

I was dressed in spotless white longs, white short-sleeved shirt, white socks and black shoes. Within 10 minutes of my arrival, SEC Chairman Kulasinghe came up the stairs hurriedly to the second floor. He was in white shorts, white shirt, knee length white stockings and black shoes. So, there were only two people in the building, both on the same floor, and both in white with one difference – he was in shorts.

I was standing near the entrance door to the floor. I had come down to check on a friend, but the floor was empty. Chairman’s office was on the same floor at the rear end and in more salubrious surroundings. I could sense an urgency as he looked excited. He proceeded to inquire in a commandeering fashion with the conversation being entirely in Sinhala:

“Looks like he is not in, Sir!” was my reply. (“Sir, Gunapala thama wedeta avilla ne wagai”)

“He is also not to be seen anywhere, Sir” (“Eyath kohewath penne ne Sir”)

“You check in the canteen” he ordered: he was clearly annoyed. (“Thamuse Gihilla canteemma balanawa”)

I had a ready reply as I had been to the canteen downstairs about five minutes earlier for a cup of tea. The doors were shut with a notice on it in all three languages announcing its opening time. “The canteen does not open till seven, Sir” (“hatha wenekan canteema arinne ne Sir”)

“Okay! Then you come with me” (“Ehenan, thamuse math ekke enewa”), thrusting his briefcase towards my midriff, for me to hold it to prevent its fall . He was somewhat petulant and rude in my opinion, somewhat small.

This was not the time to question an order nor wonder about the behavioural etiquette of superiors towards their subordinates, especially towards those in the lowest rungs. I followed the Leader, three steps behind. Fortunately, the

briefcase was not too heavy for my then skinny frame. He walked fast and I followed, with my stride kept in check

so as not to overrun the boss. He walked, nay, ran down the stairs and we were at the open ground floor of the Corporation, where the Chairman’s official car was always parked, and very prominently at that. Next to the reserved lot was the canteen, with closed gates.

There was no one in the office to signal the driver that the Chairman was on his way to the car. The driver on sighting his master, put away the Dinamina newspaper and hurriedly got out of the car to open the passenger side rear door. The Chairman got in. I was now standing near the rear door holding the briefcase.

In management studies it is said that should one wish to approach a CEO, the two most difficult obstacles to get past are the CEO’s secretary and the driver, who will thwart any minion. The air of superiority of this driver was apparent for me to witness and endure. With the driver staring at me, a surprised Kulasinghe finding me at the rear door, boomed in Sinhala: “You get into the front seat.” (“Issaraha seat ekete naginewa”)

A wry smile appeared on the driver’s face as if to indicate “You got your just desserts for not knowing your place in life”. Minions always travelled away from their superior. Subservient behaviour being the norm.

There was definitely no driver respect for an underling like me. Generally, the personal driver of the top brass of any large organization is feared because he can carry tales to the boss. Kulasinghe depended on his driver to take him everywhere. Such drivers are acutely aware that they are in an influential position.

The driver closed the rear door on the passenger side, walked in front of the vehicle ignoring me, and settled into his seat. I could see that he was unnerved at carrying extra cargo next to him. I opened the front passenger-side door, got in, closed the door and clasped the briefcase now on my lap.

“To Minister Maithripala’s office” (“Maithripala amathi thumage karyalayata”) was the directive.

The driver, a stocky darkish man, continued to ignore me, apparently concentrating on the empty road with steely eyes. I did not need any more proof from this ‘powerful’ person that I was not welcome. I was an intruder. There were only two people usually in the limousine. Sometimes there were three, when Mrs Kulasinghe shared the back seat. But now, horror of horrors, there was a third man.

I was an interested listener to the conversation between the site managers and the supremo in the back seat on the VHF. He spoke in English with about five site managers during the trip of about four miles. I was as attentive listener. A sample of the conversation went like this; “Can I speak to Mr Kandiah ? Over!”

‘Over’ is the usual signal on a one-way radio conversation, requesting the other party to speak. VHF capabilities at the time were limited to a one-way conversation only. I could hear the excited voice of the clerk at the other end through the crackling sounds;

“Chairman is on the VHF, Call Mr Kandiah” he gushed. A call from the Chairman early in the morning was a ritual, and the head of each site made it a point to report to work early. “Anil here, good morning, how are you Sir? Over!”

It was an education for me. The Chairman reviewing the progress of work, giving instructions and being precise on any technical solutions, where requested. The aura surrounding him and the reverential respect by the highly qualified project managers and engineers, was not misplaced.

The Chairman and I alighted 15 minutes later at the Ministry in Colombo Fort. Kulasinghe did not wait for the driver to come around and open the door for him. There was simplicity in the man.

I knew my place in life for the next hour. It was to be outside the door of the minister’s office after handing over the briefcase and waiting for the meeting to end, and again carrying the briefcase back to the car.

But a dramatic intervention was about to happen to change my destiny and my standing. We went up the stairs, with Kulasinghe still about three steps ahead and came to the first landing at Level-2.

Nath Amarakoon, as if coming in from the side shadows, also alighted at the same time on the landing through a corridor leading from his office. The Ministry of Housing was on the same floor. He was carrying a file. I was to find out later, that Nath had been invited by the Minister

“Morning, are you going to meet the Minister, Mr Kulasinghe” was Nath’s pleasant greeting in English’ “Yes” “So am I. Both of us will be at the bridge meeting then?”

I am sure the news would not have elated Kulasinghe. But his reaction could not be gauged with his back to me.

“So, what do you do at the Corporation?” Kulasinghe inquired with wide eyes. “I am a graduate engineer, Mr Kulasinghe.”

A wry smile appeared on Kulasinghe’s lips. I enjoyed the smile and acknowledged the greeting with a smile. Each of us knew what was going through in the other’s mind. “OK, you can come to the meeting” was his conciliatory gesture

to make amends for the faux pas of thinking I was a peon. So the trio of engineers, ascended to the Minister’s room. We were led to a polished teak table in the middle of the room, with chairs around it. There was a chair and another very smaller table about two metres away which I assumed to be my rightful position.

Nath and Kulasinghe sat around the high table in two adjoining chairs. I sat down in my chair and laid the briefcase on the small table. The peon was also looking at me, and then he disappeared, only to appear behind two other gentlemen of about Kulasinghe’s age.

“Let me introduce Sivagnanam, my Assistant Secretary to both of you” Chandrasena said. Sivagnanam smiled and shook hands all round. Then he came around to me.

“You, come and sit next to me”, Kulasinghe called and I obeyed, and sat down at the adjoining vacant seat. Next to me on the right there were three more vacant seats.

That is how at the age of 24, I sat around a table with two permanent secretaries, an assistant secretary and the chairman of SEC awaiting the arrival of the Minister. The peon brought a large pot of tea. The cups and saucers were already laid around the table.

I thought of my fiancé Lucky and was grateful that she requested me to accompany her to work at an early hour on that Monday. Unknown to her at the time, I chanced to be in high company, after all.

About five minutes later the peon again disappeared and re-appeared behind the Minister of Highways, Maithripala Senanayake. Both of them were the only people in national

dress in the room. The five trousered men got up. gave a common greeting “Morning to all.” He was the tallest man in the room and, I must say, that I was the next in height.

A lady who later I happened to find out to be a stenographer-clerk, sat down on the chair vacated by me. Another peon carrying a typewriter walked in and deposited it on the table in front of the lady. She then pulled out her note book. Unknown to me, I was about to learn a lesson on how to handle people in power, politicians or CEOs which has stood me in good stead and helped in my career.

The Minister got to the crux of the matter straightaway; and the reason for the gathering. “At the elections I gave a promise to my constituents that the bridge at Medawachiya Electorate will be built.” I cannot remember the exact location which the Minister mentioned, but the next action was noteworthy.

“Get me my briefcase, please” said Kulasinghe. I handed the briefcase and he pulled out a drawing from the case. Obviously, he had been sounded out earlier and had come prepared. Kulasinghe now standing, having laid out the drawing on the high table said “Minister, there are very big technical problems”, and at that moment, Chandrasena came across and looked at the drawing.

Chandrasena added “I agree with Kule, this bridge will cost a lot. I recommend that it not be built” If the Minister was angry, he did not show it, but looked across to Sivagnanam. The lady at the table was taking down notes, presumably in short-hand.

Sivagnanam came across, near the two engineers and directly addressed the Minister and said firmly; “Sir, what Mr Kulasinghe and Mr Chandrasena are saying is that there are technical problems. These are surmountable problems and solutions can be found”.

The other permanent secretary Nath, as if waiting for the signal to interject, now joined the fray, remaining seated. He said, “Sir, if you gave a promise to the electorate, it needs to be fulfilled. The current wooden bridge needs to be replaced with a concrete bridge. There are ways to minimize the costs.”

I was glued to my seat, attentive listener, with nothing to contribute. The Minister nodded his head in the affirmative and smiled at the two recent speakers. It was a wide smile. It was also the cue for Kulasinghe and Chandrasena to stare at Nath and at the career public servant and Assistant Secretary, Sivagnanam. The latter two had pulled the rug under the feet of two leading engineers in the country.

Kulasinghe and Chandrasena looked at Nath, and the hatred in their eyes was intense. If only looks could kill! “Thanks to all, the bridge can be built. I will inform my electorate” and the Minister got up.

through. He held the door open for Nath, followed by Sivagnanam. The stenographer turned her attention to typing. The two engineers were left in the room, forlorn. I put the drawing in the briefcase.

Kulasinghe meandered down the stairs, still ruminating at the loss of face, followed by me with the briefcase. It was obvious to me that the two high ranking and reputable engineers, one of them a permanent secretary, were raw in

political nuance and had a steep learning curve for their future dealings with ministers.

It was a case study of two prominent experienced engineers losing the battle. A young engineer with political nous, along with a career public servant who knew the game, won the day.

It was a lesson for me that Ministers are not worried about technicalities of a problem. What is music to their ears is to hear that a job can be done.

Development and Construction Corporation in 1976 at a considerable cost. The cost benefit analysis did not justify such a bridge. Do you think that the politician was worried about such analysis?

A series of a combination of time of my arrival to be the first at SEC that morning, plus my attire, and being the only one in the office led to the above episode, the recall of which still makes me smile. An incident born out of sheer coincidence and a case of mistaken identity. It was hilarious being identified as a peon, and concurrently educational in how to manage and massage a politician in delivering their needs.

Looking at the brighter side, my attire of the day plus being the first to arrive at SEC clinched a valuable experience. In Perth, I was employed at the West Australian Treasury from 2008, and we were trained on how to answer our political master, the Minister for Finance, who also doubled up as the Treasurer cum Deputy Premier.

The template in answering Ministerial Requests required the following; “If the decision after long hours of deliberation by the public servants was to agree with Minister’s requests, one were to mention the “Request can be complied with”. No supporting documentation was needed. If the answer is in the negative a maximum of a single page summary to be provided”

The reasoning was that the Minister’s time is valuable, and should not be eaten up with time consuming details. A salutary lesson for the likes of Messrs Kulasinghe and Chandrasena. Pity that such templates were not available nor advance briefings were given, as far as I was aware in 1970s for high level officers.

It was the unlikely event of Nath appearing that gave away my identity. For Kulasinghe, I was the peon, even though the circumstances leading to the conclusion was a series of coincidences. However, I had no qualms about carrying the briefcase for the man. Respect towards Kulasinghe came naturally to all who worked with him.

In essence Kulasinghe, an engineer of repute, was responsible for training and producing many a capable engineer, technical officer and quantity surveyor. These professionals are now spread around the world. Raising professionalism was Kulasinghe’s gift to the country of his birth and the unintended benefit to the world. The departure of professionals were primarily due to a combination of factors; performance of the politicians, ethnic unrest and lack of economic progress being the top three.

construction body in Ceylon/Sri Lanka in the 1970s. All rolled into one, SEC was the planner, designer, project manager and contractor of major building projects for the government. All these being done internally created efficiencies and provided a sound training ground for youngsters like me.

At the same time being a semi-government agency there were some bureaucratic and financial inefficiencies which resulted in cost blow ups on many projects that SEC undertook. Kulasinghe left in 1972, with Nath taking over the dual responsibility of Chairmanship of SEC in addition to his permanent secretarial duties.

All mentioned in this story, the first part of which appeared last week, have passed on except me.

• Dayantha Wijeyesekera passed away in 2023. He lived in Sri Lanka and became the Chancellor of the Open University. Prior to his posting, he was the Professor of Civil Engineering at University of Moratuwa and subsequently its Vice Chancellor. An achiever who contributed immensely to progress the educational sector.

• Brahman Sivaprakasapillai was responsible for designing and installing the sewerage pumping systems for the newly built Mahiyangana Hospital. After the communal clashes of 1983 he migrated to USA contributing to our brain drain. He retired after a career at the UN in New York where he lived till his passing away in 2021. During winter and for six months from November he moved to his other home in sunny Florida.

• Kamal Nathan left around 1973 and is retired after being an Associate Professor at a University in Singapore.

• David Gunasekera worked for the Department of Housing in Canberra having left the country in mid 70s.

• Importantly, Gunapala from Gampaha got a transfer to another Corporation nearer his home and subsequently a promotion to be chief peon.

• Sirisena, I understand hedged his bets correctly as his master, the Assistant Personnel Manager in 1970, was subsequently appointed a High Commissioner to many countries under the UNP regimes of Prime Minister and President Ranasinghe Premadasa, who was assassinated in 1992. Sirisena’s master was related to the then President’s wife and as usual “Theory of Relativity” was more important than efficiency. Sirisena served his master and saw the world in the dual capacities of a driver and a house helper at the respective High Commissions.

• What happened to the driver? I have not been able to find out.

• Lucky and I married in 1973 and are still going strong. We have one child, a son.

Srima Dissanayake runs for president and I get sidelined in the UNP

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.