LunuDehi … spicing up the music scene

When one talks of ‘lunu-dehi’ what comes to mind is the local appetizer … to enhance the taste of our meals; but that scene has now changed!

People have forgotten about the appetizer and refer to LunuDehi as the band that is spicing up the music scene, not only locally, but abroad, as well.

They did three consecutive tours, recently, lasting five weeks, taking in the USA and Malaysia (with Bathiya & Santhush), and the UK.

The Malaysian gig, Maristella OBA dinner dance, was a sold out event and, according to reports coming my way, the crowd was on the floor from the very first song, and they danced the night away … until it was all over.

Their next foreign assignment is scheduled to commence in September, to Australia, New Zealand and Singapore (with Bathiya & Santhush)) and Germany, in November.

Dushan Jayathilake and Nalin Sam are the co-leaders of LunuDehi and they have certainly taken the band to great heights.

Dushan, a well-known keyboardist, first gained major recognition through his work with the legendary Gypsies band, where he performed and directed music, under the guidance of Sunil Perera and Piyal.

He is also widely respected for his exceptional talent in music arranging and composing.

Over the years, Dushan has contributed musical arrangements and productions for some of Sri Lanka’s most celebrated artistes, including Bathiya & Santhush, Chamara Weerasinghe, Laxman Hilmi, Ajith Perera, Ginger White, and Corrine Almeida, among many others.

His work has played a significant role in shaping the sound of numerous popular Sri Lankan songs.

As a composer, Dushan has also created original songs, under his own name, including ‘Mal Sriya’, ‘Mathakayan’, and ‘Oyata Seethalada’, and is also highly recognised for creatively remaking classic songs of the Gypsies, while preserving their original spirit and energy, for newer audiences.

Nalin Sam is an extremely talented musician, guitarist, vocalist, and music educator, with a rich career, spanning over two decades.

Nalin: Toured internationally, over 100 times, with Bathiya & Santhush

He started as assistant music composer for Young Asia Television, and moved to Dubai, in 2003, performing with the group Revelation, and teaching music at the Popular Music Institute (Yamaha) and GEMS Music Hub.

Nalin has also collaborated with international artistes like Asha Bhosle, Morten Harket (of A-ha fame) and world-renowned cellist Jean Decroos.

With Morten Harket it was an acoustic session, at the opening of YATV (Young Asia Television), in 1996, and with Asha Bhosle and Bhatiya and Santhush, at the Sugathadasa Stadium, in Colombo, in 2011.

Having earned a diploma in Music Teaching, from the Trinity College of Music (RockSchool), in 2012, Nalin currently teaches guitar, online.

Nalin shares a long and successful musical relationship with Bhatiya & Santhush, performing, on stage, as their main guitarist, lead, acoustic and classical guitar, and has toured internationally, over 100 times, with Bathiya & Santhush.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.