THE ROAD TO GAZA – I

On October 7th it will be two years since the commencement of the Gaza War

Pankkaj Mishra FRSL has authored Age of Anger and From the Ruins of Empire and writes political and literary essays in The Guardian, the London Review of Books and The New Yorker.

“We too are so dazzled by power and money that we forget the fragility of our existence; we forget that we are all in the Ghetto, that the Ghetto is fenced in, that outside the fence are the Lords of Death, and a little way off the train is waiting,” Primo Levi Jewish Italian partisan, Holocaust survivor and writer.

The prologue to this book deals with the death of the Warsaw Ghetto during the Second World War. The Ghetto was progressively depleted as the inhabitants were being shipped to extermination camps. Finally in April 1943 a couple of hundred young Polish Jews grabbed whatever arms and weapons they could lay their hands on and took on the Nazis.

“After a few desperate weeks” explains Pankkaj Mishra, “the resisters were overwhelmed. Most of them killed. Some still alive on the last day committed suicide in the command bunker. As the Nazis pumped gas into it a few managed to escape through sewer pipes. German soldiers then burnt the Ghetto, block by block, using flame throwers to smoke out the survivors. The Polish poet Czeslaw Milosz recalls hearing screams from the Ghetto: They were the screams of people being murdered.

“Living in Berkley California while the US military bombed and killed hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese, an atrocity he compared to the crimes of Hitler and Stalin, Milosz again knew shameful complicity in extreme barbarity: ‘If we are capable of compassion and at the same time are powerless,’ he wrote, ‘then we live in a state of desperate exasperation.’”

Mishra goes on to explain that several generations of Jews were scarred by the Shoah (the Hebrew term for the Holocaust, the genocide of European Jews by Nazi Germany) and to them the unexpected attack on 7 October 2023 in Gaza by Hamas reinforced the spectre of the Holocaust. But he also grapples with the paradox of post-October Seventh.

In Gaza it is the Palestinians: Muslims, Christians and Agnostics who in the words of Irishman Blinne Ni Ghralaigh representing South Africa, would tell the International Court of Justice in The Hague, were “broadcasting their own destruction in real time in the desperate hope that the world might do something!”

Long before the Shoah the Germans had participated in ‘crushing the Yellow Peril’ during the 1899-1901 Boxer Rebellion. Under General Lothar von Trotha, the Imperial German Army had been used first against Chinese. And in 1904 in Namibia (then German South-West Africa), once again under von Trotha they murdered sixty-five thousand Herero out of a population of about eighty thousand. This was followed in 1905-07 in German East Africa (now Tanzania) where a rebellion by the Africans resulted in eighty thousand deaths, many executed by machine gun fire while two hundred thousand perished in the resulting famine.

The Allied Powers did not go to war against the Axis Powers in September 1939 to liberate the European Jews who were persecuted and finally sent to their deaths in gas chambers at the concentration camps. Anti-Semitism as state policy began much earlier in 1933 when the Nazi Party was elected to office in Germany and then spread across Europe. Hence throughout that period Jews were trying to escape their countries of origin in Continental Europe. “But neither the American State Department nor the British Foreign Office wished to rescue them (instead they) worked to avoid a situation in which Germany and its allies would force out tens of thousands of Jews into Allied hands.”

On the night of 9 November 1938 known as Kristallnacht, at the behest of the Nazi Party, across Germany and Austria, Jewish homes, businesses and synagogues were systematically attacked and Jews killed. In the wake of Kristallnacht then British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain in a letter to his sister wrote that “no doubt Jews aren’t a lovable people; I don’t care about them myself, but that is not sufficient to explain the Pogrom.” The London Observer meanwhile cautioned: If a further accretion of say hundred thousand Jewish refugees come into the country, how could the danger be averted of an anti-Jewish feeling here? In 1940 “British authorities in Palestine deported fifteen hundred Jews, half of them women and children, to Mauritius.” Jewish immigration to the US had already been limited in 1924, but even as late as 1939 Charles Lindbergh thought “there are too many in places like New York already.”

Immortalised in the 1976 motion picture Voyage of the Damned, is the tragic true story of how in May 1939 nine hundred mostly Jewish refugees from Germany attempt to flee to Cuba, the USA or Canada. But none of these countries would accept the refugees and the ship returned with all its passengers to Europe where many of the Jews would end in death camps.

But the plight of the Jews only got worse. “White supremacists in the US State Department ensured as David Wyman records in The Abandonment of the Jews (1984) that “only 21,000 refugees were allowed to enter the US during the years it was at war (with Germany) only ten percent of the number who could have been legally admitted under immigration quotas.”

In a 1941 letter to an American friend who personally knew President Roosevelt, Otto Frank father of Anne explained “the US is the only country we can go to.” Hiram Bingham a US diplomat in Marseilles managed in the late 1930s to get Hannah Arndt and other Jewish intellectuals out of France before he was forced to resign by his State Department superiors.

The Shoah did not end with the surrender of Nazi Germany in May 1945.”In 1946 in Kielce 180km from Warsaw a Polish mob killed 40 out of the 200 Jews who returned. Britain too was cautious about receiving Jewish survivors, like Blacks from the West Indies they were only accepted if they were “of good human stock!”

“Jews have been prominent figures in the Western Internationalist Left that emerged after the Russian Revolution and distinguished itself through a valiant losing battle against fascism in Spain. Socialism offered Jews not only integration and acceptance within their (European) societies, but also a likely role in shaping their future. Thus Jews came to be disproportionately represented in left wing parties, noticeably in Soviet Russia.”

Not only Karl Marx but Eduard Bernstein in Germany, Rosa Luxembourg in Poland, Bela Kun in Hungary, Kurt Eisner in Bavaria and Leon Trotsky in Russia had dominated revolutionary politics in Europe. Jews like Martov, Dan, Radek, Zinoviev and Trotsky were conspicuous in the Russian Revolutions of 1905 and 1917. “Zionist settlers from Europe brought with them to Palestine socialistic ideas of collective farming, trade unions and economic planning.” The kibbutz a communal settlement, engaging in agriculture and other activities, was first introduced by European Jews in 1910 at Degania in Palestine.

In 1947 Stalin crucially supported, together with Belorussia, Ukraine, Poland and Czechoslovakia and the Communist Parties in UK and Italy, the UN plan for partitioning Palestine and creating a Jewish State. “The Soviet Union also armed the Zionists, enabling the expulsion of 750,000 Palestinians in 1948 remembered as the Nakba (catastrophe).”

Radical intellectuals in western Europe and north America like Jean-Paul Sartre and Martin Luther King also viewed Israel through sympathetic eyes; but this enthusiasm waned after the 1967 War.

On the other hand Dan Stone in The Liberation of the Camps (2015) records how British Diplomats were cautious about accepting Jewish survivors at the end of World War II citing the danger of ‘Judeo-Bolshevism.’  Unattributed quotations taken from MISHRA, Pankkaj The World After Gaza  (2025) Fern Press, London

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.