HNB Life celebrates landmark year for affiliations at Partnership Awards 2026

HNB Life PLC recently hosted the Partnership Awards 2026, recognising and celebrating the outstanding contributions of its Bancassurance and Alternate Channel officers who played a pivotal role in driving the Company’s remarkable performance during 2025, marked by strong growth across new business, renewals, fee income, investments and group life.

The Partnership Channel recorded Rs. 10.4 billion in Gross Written Premium (GWP), reflecting a 58 percent growth, while New Business Premium (NBP) reached Rs. 2.3 billion, also recording 58 percent growth. Renewal business grew by an impressive 47 percent to Rs. 4.2 billion, demonstrating the strength and depth of customer relationships built through the channel.Further strengthening channel performance, the Alternate Channel contributed Rs. 2.2 billion in GWP, accounting for 21 percent of the Partnership Channel’s overall business volume.

These achievements reflect the growing importance of the Partnership Channel to HNB Life’s overall growth journey, while reflecting the strength of the relationships forged with its extensive network of banking and broker partners.

Commenting on the significance of the achievement, Lasitha Wimalaratne, Executive Director / Chief Executive Officer of HNB Life PLC said, “Year 2025 was truly a defining year for our Partnership Channel, and I am extremely proud and delighted to see the tremendous progress it has made. It is encouraging to see the channel evolve from strength to strength, playing an increasingly important role in driving our growth and reaching more customers. To me, personally, these numbers are more than just indicators of growth, they represent the trust our partners have placed in us and the collective determination to create greater value for our customers.”

Sanesh Fernando, Executive Vice President / Chief Business Officer of HNB Life PLC, added, “The success of our Partnership Channel is built on collaboration. The exceptional growth we achieved across new business, renewals, MRP, investments and Group Life is a reflection of what is possible when our teams and partners work towards a shared ambition. The Partnership Awards are our way of recognising the people behind these achievements. I must also acknowledge and sincerely thank HNB, our partner banks and broker network for their continued confidence. We will certainly work towards building our partnership to even greater heights.”