People’s Bank ‘YES Infinity 2026’ unveils exclusive lifestyle banking benefits

People’s Bank has marked International Youth Day 2026 by introducing a range of exclusive benefits under its ‘YES Infinity 2026’ programme, further strengthening its commitment to empowering Sri Lanka’s youth with modern, convenient and rewarding banking solutions.

Designed to complement the dynamic lifestyles and aspirations of today’s young generation, YES Infinity 2026 offers a host of lifestyle and financial benefits, including discounts of up to 40 percent at selected merchant outlets island wide, together with a special interest rate  on People’s Auto Loans and other exclusive privileges.The YES Infinity 2026 benefits are valid from 12 August 2026 to 30th September 2026.

Commenting on the initiative, Deputy General Manager – Retail Banking of People’s Bank, A.U.A. Anzar, said:“People’s Bank was founded in 1961 with the aim of bringing banking services closer to the general public. From its inception, the Bank has successfully introduced branded accounts tailored to customers of different age groups and professions, thereby making modern banking services more accessible to the people of Sri Lanka.

In 2003, to commemorate International Youth Day, People’s Bank introduced the YES Account specifically to meet the needs of Sri Lanka’s ambitious youth. Today, the YES Savings Account continues to evolve in line with the fast-paced lifestyles of young people, combining smart savings solutions with attractive financial benefits and digital convenience.

As we mark International Youth Day 2026, we are once again ready to offer a host of benefits to support the youth of Sri Lanka in achieving their dreams and aspirations.

These benefits include the ability to manage finances anytime and anywhere, 24/7 cash deposit facilities through our extensive network of over 350 Cash Deposit Machines (CDMs) and Cash Recycling Machines (CRMs) island wide, banking accessibility across the country and specially curated financial products designed to support their individual goals.

In addition, YES Infinity 2026 provides discounts of up to 40% at selected merchants islandwide, along with special rates on People’s Auto Loans, further enhancing the overall value proposition for YES Account holders.”

The YES Infinity 2026 benefits are available to both new and existing People’s Bank YES Account holders who use their YES Debit Card.

The special 0.5 percent interest rate reduction on People’s Auto Loans is available to eligible YES Account holders.

The merchant discounts are applicable at participating partner outlets when payments are made using the YES Debit Card, giving young customers the opportunity to enjoy attractive savings on a range of lifestyle-related purchases.

Through YES Infinity 2026, People’s Bank continues its longstanding commitment to supporting the financial aspirations of Sri Lanka’s youth by combining accessible banking, digital convenience, tailored financial solutions and lifestyle benefits in a single proposition.