Complaint lodged with CIABOC against all NPP MPs

Colombo, Sep. 3 (Daily Mirror) - A complaint has been lodged against all 159 National People's Power (NPP) MPs and officials in charge of NPP and Janatha Vimkuthi Peramuna (JVP) with the Commission to Inquire Allegations against Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC) by Nidahas Satan Madyastanaya yesterday.

Dharashana Tanthrige who lodged a complaint on behalf of the Nidahas Satan Madyastanaya said the complaint was based on the violation of section 42 and 43 of Anti-Corruption Act no 9 of 2023.

“MP are entitled to an office maintenance allowance of Rs 100,000, a telephone allowance of Rs 50,000, an allowance to pay salaries of a driver fuel allowance and an attendance allowance of Rs 2,500 per session. These allowances are paid for serving the people and to build a rapport with them. These allowances are released from the consolidated fund to perform specific tasks as MPs. Especially the MPs are to set up an office in the respective constituency and for traveling when providing services to the people. Also the monthly payments are made to cover the costs incurred in communicating with the people,” he said.

“The representatives of the NPP have publicly accepted that all payments that are made to the MPs are credited to an account held by the party. There is no provision in the law to dispose of public funds to such external accounts. Accordingly the NPP and JVP had committed an offence as per Anti-Corruption Act No 9 of 2023. The party earns undue financial benefits,” he added.

The complainants therefore requested CIABOC to conduct a probe on all NPP MPs by summoning them. The CIABOC was requested to determine whether there is any violation of statutory laws.

Copies of documents including financial records of the NPP were handed over to CIABOC. The Complainants claimed that financial records were copies of what NPP had handed to the Commission of Election. As per these records a total of Rs 215,316, 076.78 has been received by the party in the form of MP salaries and allowances last year.