Theekshana Jayarathna appointed CEO of TWC Development Management

TWC Founder and Executive Chairman Thilan Wijesinghe yesterday announced the appointment of Theekshana Jayarathna as Chief Executive Officer of TWC Development Management Ltd., (TWCDM), as the group continues to strengthen its leadership team to support its expanding domestic and regional operations.

TWC Development Management specialises in leading complex real estate developments from concept to completion, transforming land and existing properties into economically viable and sustainable assets. The company provides integrated development management services encompassing development strategy, project feasibility, financial and investment structuring, regulatory approvals, design management, construction oversight, marketing, operational readiness, and asset stabilisation.

Wijesinghe said: “The appointment of Theekshana reflects the continued growth and evolution of TWC’s development management business. His technical and financial expertise on multiple real estate asset classes has strengthened our ability to deliver value to our clients that include local corporates, family offices and offshore investment funds.”

Prior to joining TWC in 2022, Theekshana Jayarathna spent 14 years at John Keells Group as Assistant Vice President and Head of Asset Management & New Business Development, where he gained extensive experience across the full spectrum of development management disciplines. At JKH he was involved in multiple apartment, hotel and retail projects including Cinnamon Life, having an aggregate value of approximately USD 1.5 billion.

Jayarathna, noted: “I am delighted to lead TWC Development Management at a time when Sri Lanka’s real estate and tourism sectors are entering a new phase of opportunity. Our ambition is to be the partner of choice for investors and developers seeking commercially focused, end-to-end development management solutions that maximise value throughout the project lifecycle. Together with the corporate finance expertise of the wider TWC Group, we look forward to delivering innovative, sustainable and commercially successful developments that create lasting value for our clients and stakeholders.”

Theekshana is a qualified member of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (UK) and also holds qualifications in Quantity Surveying and Building Economics from the University of Reading (UK).

TWCDM has played a leading role in several landmark transactions, including acting as sell-side adviser on the $ 96 million sale of the 5 Marina Plots at Colombo Port City to Browns Investments - the largest land sale transaction in Sri Lanka’s history. The company is currently advising on a pipeline of tourism, hospitality, and commercial real estate projects valued in excess of $ 120 million.

TWCDM works synergistically with TWC Capital Ltd., the group’s corporate finance arm led by CEO Rasanja Perera. TWC Capital specialises in mergers and acquisitions and capital raising and is currently engaged in hospitality and corporate finance transactions involving clients in India, Singapore, the Middle East, and Sri Lanka.