High powered delegation of Indian IT CEOs in town

A high powered delegation of Indian IT CEOs led by NASSCOM President Rajesh Nambiar is visiting Colombo from 4-6 December.

NASSCOM is the leading business chamber of Indian IT and software companies. The CEOs are currently in Colombo for their Offsite Executive Meeting and to explore opportunities for strengthening India-Sri Lanka collaboration in the technology and IT sector.

A high level roundtable was organised on 4 December 2025 to boost collaboration between the NASSCOM and the SLASSCOM.

In her remarks, Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya warmly welcomed the NASSCOM CEOs and appreciated them for their support towards building a resilient Sri Lanka and promoting continued tourism. She encouraged them to consider Sri Lanka as a destination for their business expansion and growth, especially in view of the natural bonds of culture and friendship between the two countries.

Indian High Commissioner Santosh Jha briefed the NASSCOM and SLASSCOM leadership on India’s role as a first responder in the current crisis and appreciated the NASSCOM CEOs visit as a symbol of bringing in normalcy and recovery for Sri Lanka.

President Special Envoy for Foreign Investment and Western Province Governor Hanif Yusoof and Deputy Digital Economy Minister Eranga Weeraratne also addressed the NASSCOM CEOs encouraging them to invest and build technology in Sri Lanka.

Chief Advisor to the President on Digital Economy Dr. Hans Wijayasuriya briefed the NASSCOM CEOs on the readiness of Sri Lanka’s digital transformation and invited the Indian IT sector to invest and partner in its growth.

NASSCOM President Rajesh Nambiar noted the Indian IT industry’s solidarity and support towards Sri Lanka in this crisis. He expressed readiness of the Indian industry to collaborate with Government of Sri Lanka and SLASSCOM to build innovation and technology partnerships between India and Sri Lanka, as well as support Sri Lanka’s skilling efforts in an AI world. In this regard, NASSCOM Chairperson Sindhu Gangadharan invited SLASSCOM to participate in the AI Impact Summit 2026 hosted by India to contribute to building the Global South’s perspective on the contours of the AI World.