Authenticity of early Buddhism and its relevance to the present

Dr. Geewananda Gunawardena’s letter titled ‘The Evolution of Modern Buddhist Practices’ (The Sunday Island, 24.05. 2026), which invites a wider discussion of the matter, made me write this brief note. He quite rightly points out the possibility of extrinsic material being introduced into the Dhamma as it was preserved by the oral tradition over a long period of time. Dhamma was written down at Aluvihare, Sri Lanka in the 1st Century CE, nearly five centuries after its origin. Dr.Gunawardena in dealing with his main topic raises the question of the origin of rituals practised by Sri Lankan Buddhists. The two matters may be related.

In discussing this matter, we may have to first ascertain the core content of the Dhamma during Buddha’s lifetime, see how reliable was its preservation and what was the material that was introduced into it later. The oral tradition of recording was in operation during the Buddha’s lifetime as well, under his personal supervision with the help of his chief disciples, particularly Ven. Ananda. The main doctrines and tenets that Buddha preached which were carefully preserved were discoursed at the First Buddhist Council (Dhammasangayana) held just three months after Buddha Parinirvana. The senior monks decided to classify and divide the content into four Nikayas as follows; Digha, Majjima, Anguttara and Samyukta. These were the Nikayas that were assigned to groups of monks for preservation by the oral tradition which was considered to be more reliable than writing during that time.

Further the content of these four Nikayas are corroborated to a significant degree by the Chinese Buddhist texts called the “Agamas” which were the translations from the original Pali by Chinese pilgrim monks led by Xuan Zang (6th Century CE). Therefore, the contents of these four Nikayas may be considered as closest to the Buddha Word, preserved by the apparently reliable oral tradition.

What came to be known as Early Buddhism is contained in these four Nikayas. Furthermore, this Dhamma was revised by Ven. Moggalliputtatissa at the Third Buddhist Council held under the patronage of King Dharmasoka before it was transmitted to Sri Lanka in the 3rd Century BCE.

Whatever that was introduced after the establishment of Early Buddhism may have to be examined to see whether they align with the original contained in the four main Nikayas and how these extrinsic material influenced the practice of Buddhism at present with emphasis on the origin of rituals.

Before that, let us look at the method adopted by the Buddha to ensure that his preaching was preserved and no alterations were made. A highly structured and effective method was operative during the Buddha’s lifetime to preserve his Dhamma (teachings) and Vinaya (monastic discipline). While writing existed in ancient India, it was not used for literature or religious texts; instead, the teachings were preserved through a rigorous oral tradition designed for accuracy and memorization. Monks and nuns would listen to the Buddha’s discourses, memorize them, and regularly recite them together to ensure accuracy. Specific groups of monks were assigned the responsibility of memorizing particular suttas (discourses) or sections of the Vinaya. To facilitate memorization, the teachings were often structured in summary forms (Uddesa, Niddesa). The Buddha advised that new material not taught by him should not be added, and his original teachings should not be deleted, edited, or misinterpreted. The teachings were passed down in repetitive and rhythmic structures (pâli), making them easier to memorize and harder to alter. Ven Ananda served as the primary custodian of the Buddha’s words.

At the First Buddhist Council Bhanaka monks were appointed who had the special ability to memorize the Dhamma. The Bhânaka system (from the Pali root bhaṇ, meaning “to speak” or “recite”) was a specialized oral tradition where specific lineages of monks – known as Bhânakas (reciters) – were responsible for memorizing, reciting, and transmitting the Pali Tipitaka. This system ensured the precise preservation of the Buddha’s teachings for roughly four centuries after his passing until the canon was written down in the 1st century BCE in Sri Lanka. These groups of Bhanakas were headed by senior monks like Upali (for Vinaya) and Ananda (for Sutta). The teachings were preserved through rigorous, regular recitation (uddesa) and investigation of the texts (paripucchana). Groups of monks would recite the texts together to compare, correct, and ensure the fidelity of the oral record.

Now let us see how new material was introduced into the Buddha Dhamma. Groups of monks who differed from senior monks and dissented, broke away and formed schools such as Mahasanghika, Puggalavada, Sarvastivada, Sautrantika etc which though remained loyal to Theravada and agreed on the main doctrines like Three Signs, Four Noble Truths, had different viewpoints on the nature of personality (five aggregates), rebirth etc. Finally, due to these developments and also the influence of other religious traditions like Brahmanism, there was the birth of Mahayana in the 1st Century CE which made the historical human Buddha into a supernatural, eternal, transcendental being. Further Mahayana borrowed critical concepts from Brahmanism that had a far-reaching influence on the practice of Buddhism. One such concept was the “Bhakthi Marga” (Path of Faith) which was an alternate path to salvation which could replace the “Jnana Marga” (Path of Wisdom) which was the path discovered by the Buddha. It was “Bhakthi Marga” that prescribed the practice of rituals which carried merit, accumulation of which would enable the achievement of Nirvana. Practice of rituals was the means of gaining “Moksha” in Brahmanism/Hinduism.

In contrast there is no mention of rituals as a means of attaining Nibbana in the four main Nikayas that comprise Early Buddhism. Further there is no evidence that rituals were practised in Sri Lanka before the arrival of Mahayana in the 5th Century CE. Moreover Arahath Mahinda had not made any attempt to introduce rituals into Sri Lanka, his endeavour was to teach the Dhamma contained in Early Buddhism to the people of Sri Lanka.

Mahayana was introduced to Sri Lanka by intrigue in the 5th Century CE and lasted till the 10th. The concept of “Bhakthi Marga” was one of its important tenets that remained with Theravada after the decline of Mahayana.

Apart from Mahayana another factor that helped the establishment of rituals in Sri Lanka is the influence of Ven. Buddhagosa who came to Sri Lanka in the 5th Century. He had spent some time in South India before coming to Sri Lanka and may have come under the influence of Mahayana, which was dominant in that part of India at that time. It was the latter, via his translations of the Sinhalese Commentaries to the Tripitaka, who transformed the Buddha from the status of a normal human being to a larger-than-life, super-human with transcendental features. It was Buddhagosa who introduced dividend-carrying rituals, converted Buddhist gods into gods with powers to protect people and made stupas and bodhi tree objects of veneration and worship with merit for the practitioner (see “Beyond ritualistic realm” MMJ Marasinghe, 2018). Some stories describe people offering flowers and incense to Buddha (see Buddhagosa’s commentary on Kalinga Bodhi Jataka). There is no evidence that these features were known or practised in Sri Lanka before the advent of Ven. Buddhagosa. In this connection, Prof Marasinghe says; “The hard work of Buddhagosa and the Mahavihara fraternity culminated in the formulation of a new ritual structure with attractive advantages to keep both the lay followers and the members of the Sanga happy and content”. These changes destroyed, to some degree, the uniqueness of Buddhism.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.