Virtusa hosts leadership from British insurer CFC to unveil 200-seat digital service hub in Sri Lanka

CFC Chief Operating Officer Matthew Glenville (left) and Virtusa Corporation Managing Director – UK and Ireland Atul Gupta, along with other senior leadership of CFC and Virtusa Corporation, cutting the ribbon to the newly commenced digital services hub

Visiting senior leadership team of Virtusa with CFC Chief Operating Officer Matthew Glenville (fourth from left) at the newly commenced digital services hub

Virtusa Corporation, in partnership with CFC, a pioneer in insurance solutions for emerging risk and market leader in cyber, yesterday opened the doors to CFC’s 200-seat digital services hub in Colombo.

The opening ceremony was attended by senior leadership from CFC and Virtusa including CFC Chief Operations Officer Matthew Glenville, Virtusa Corporation COO Venkatesan Vijayaraghavan, Managing Director – UK and Ireland Atul Gupta, and Senior Vice Presidents and Joint Country Heads (Sri Lanka) Denver De Zylva and Shehan Warusavithana.

The newly opened digital services hub underscores the strategic importance of Sri Lanka in the global delivery network of Virtusa which spans 50+ locations across 26 countries.

The new hub will seat 200 technologists and will focus on delivering domain-led enterprise solutions in areas such as data-driven underwriting, AI-powered claims processing, and digital customer engagement. By opening the digital services hub in Sri Lanka, CFC will be better positioned to deliver faster, more personalised, and future-ready services to its global customer base.

Virtusa Corporation Managing Director – UK and Ireland Atul Gupta said, “Our relationship with CFC is built on a shared commitment to innovation and transformation. The opening of this new Digital Services Centre in Colombo is a natural extension of that partnership, bringing together CFC’s forward-looking vision for the insurance industry with Virtusa’s proven digital engineering and delivery capabilities.”

Virtusa has maintained a strong presence in Sri Lanka for nearly three decades and is today one of the country’s largest technology companies. This heritage, combined with its engineering excellence and global reputation for digital transformation, makes Virtusa a trusted partner for enterprises like CFC that are looking to scale new digital capabilities.

CFC Chief Operations Officer Matthew Glenville said, “The opening of our digital services hub in Colombo marks an exciting milestone in CFC’s global transformation journey. We’ve been deeply impressed by the innovation capability and quality of talent Virtusa has presented us in Sri Lanka, and the strategic advantages the country offers as a delivery destination. This new centre will play a pivotal role in scaling our digital-first capabilities, enabling us to deliver smarter, faster service to our customers around the world.”

The event concluded with both organisations reaffirming their commitment to driving innovation, collaboration, and sustainable growth through the Colombo hub. For Sri Lanka, the launch reinforces the nation’s growing reputation as a trusted destination for global capability centres and accelerates its integration into the international digital economy. For CFC and Virtusa, it marks the beginning of an ambitious chapter focused on talent, technology, and transformation.

Virtusa Corporation Chief Operating Officer Venkatesan Vijayaraghavan said, “We are delighted to celebrate the official opening of the CFC Digital Services Centre in Colombo. This partnership reflects not only the confidence global enterprises place in Virtusa as a technology partner, but also in Sri Lanka’s exceptional talent and innovation ecosystem. At Virtusa, we are proud to bring together CFC’s vision for future-ready insurance with our engineering and AI expertise. Together, we are creating a hub that not only delivers next generation digital solutions for the global market but also contributes to Sri Lanka’s digital economy ambitions by generating meaningful opportunities for local professionals.”