Ceylon Chamber strengthens business links with Qatar and Lebanon

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce has strengthened its international business network with the signing of Memoranda of Understanding with the Qatar Sri Lanka Business Council (QSLBC), and the Chamber of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture of Beirut and Mount Lebanon (CCIA-BML).

The MoU with the Qatar Sri Lanka Business Council was signed at the Ceylon Chamber, while the agreement with CCIA-BML was signed virtually.

The signing with the QSLBC comes as Sri Lanka and Qatar mark 50 years of bilateral relations, providing an opportunity to further strengthen commercial ties and business-to-business engagement between the two countries.

Speaking at the signing ceremonies, The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce Chairperson Krishan Balendra welcomed the agreements and said the Chamber was pleased to support and cooperate with both organisations. He noted that the partnerships would help strengthen connections between the respective business communities and create opportunities for greater trade, investment and commercial engagement.

QSLBC Secretary B.A.W.C. Gunasekara welcomed the agreement, noting its potential to further strengthen business relations between Sri Lanka and Qatar and facilitate greater interaction between companies in both markets.

At the virtual signing of the MOU with the CCIA-BML in the presence of the Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the Lebanese Republic, Anura Withanage, Mohamed Choucair, Chairman of the CCIA-BML, also welcomed the partnership, noting the scope for closer cooperation between the two chambers and greater business engagement between Sri Lanka and Lebanon.

The two MoUs provide a framework for the Chambers to exchange business and economic information, facilitate contacts between their respective business communities and identify opportunities for trade, investment and commercial cooperation.

The agreements add to the Ceylon Chamber’s international network of chamber and business organisation partnerships, supporting its efforts to connect Sri Lankan businesses with overseas markets, partners and investment opportunities.