Michelin Key honours three Resplendent Ceylon properties

Three Resplendent Ceylon properties, Ceylon Tea Trails, Wild Coast Tented Lodge and Caper Weligama, have won Michelin Key Awards 2025 for the South Asia region, the property owner announced last week.

Ceylon Tea Trails stands out as the only property in Sri Lanka to be awarded the prestigious three Michelin Keys, reaffirming its reputation as the pinnacle of luxury estate living, the announcement said. Wild Coast Tented Lodge won two Keys and Cape Weligama, one.

Malik J. Fernando, Chairman of Resplendent Ceylon, commented: “We are honoured to see all three of our resorts recognized by the Michelin Key distinctions. To have Ceylon Tea Trails as the only Sri Lankan property with three Keys is a proud moment, underscoring our belief in offering extraordinary, authentic experiences that showcase the very best of Sri Lanka. These accolades are a testament to the passion and dedication of our teams, and to our ongoing mission of elevating the island’s standing as a world-class luxury destination.”

The Michelin Key distinctions were unveiled in Paris recently at the inaugural global awards ceremony. The Michelin Keys were introduced in 2023 as the hotel world’s equivalent of the Michelin Star—highlights the very best stays worldwide.

Keys are awarded to hotels excelling across five universal criteria: architecture and interior design; service quality; personality and character; value for money; and contribution to the local environment. The recognition spans all types of lodging, from boutique city hotels and heritage castles to ryokans, luxury tents, and remote retreats.

While some Key properties may also host Michelin-Starred restaurants, the awards are determined independently, ensuring each Key reflects the highest standards of lodging excellence. The rare Three Michelin Keys signify an extraordinary stay, the highest benchmark in global hospitality — where design, comfort, and service converge to create an experience that lingers in memory long after departure.

Resplendent Ceylon, who own and operate the awarded properties is the sole Sri Lankan member of Relais & Châteaux, offers the discerning traveler a remarkable circuit across Sri Lanka, with a collection of small, luxury resorts, each set in scenic and environmentally outstanding locations.

Ceylon Tea Trails, Wild Coast Tented Lodge, and Cape Weligama form part of the prestigious Relais & Châteaux association, renowned for its commitment to culinary excellence and unique hospitality experiences worldwide.

“Resplendent Ceylon is the hospitality arm of Dilmah Ceylon Tea, one of the world’s most recognized and respected tea brands. Its portfolio, which also includes Ahu Bay and Kayaam Wellness, embodies the philosophy of “luxury with purpose,” celebrating the island’s rich heritage, culture, and biodiversity while making meaningful contributions to local communities and the environment,” the announcement said.

Serendib Flour Mills spreads joy on World Children’s Day with children of Digana Rehabilitation Hospital

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.