Lanka Aluminium boosts retail sector with credit terms and credit card offerings

Lanka Aluminium Industries PLC, Sri Lanka’s pioneering aluminium extruder, is transforming the retail aluminium extrusion supplies market by offering credit terms as well as credit card payment facilities at the company’s retail outlets that are being established island-wide.

“We have observed a growing demand for the more generic architectural and hardware sections, which are usually sold in retail outlets. In order to capitalise on this opportunity, we are offering credit terms and credit card payment facilities to selected customers through our retail network,” said Dinal Peiris – Chairman, Lanka Aluminium Industries PLC.

Lanka Aluminium has provided its architectural aluminium extrusion solutions to some of the most prestigious and iconic buildings in the country, including those that meet international standards. The company continues to assist clients by providing tech support, wind load calculations, and assembly drawings.

In the absence of growth in the high-rise segment, the company has decided to focus on the retail segment.

“We plan to use our strong technical skills and large selection of doors and windows to assist customers, especially home builders, to select the most appropriate product and not necessarily the most expensive one,” said Susantha Paranagama – Head of retail.

“This helps the customer to save money and get the best product, thereby building trust and confidence. We also provide them with shop and assembly drawings and introduce suitable fabricators,” he said.

“We are confident that offering these services and facilities, free of charge, to our valued customers will enable us to build long-term relationships, thereby increasing the usage of aluminium doors and windows, especially amongst house builders,” said Susantha Paranagama.

Lanka Aluminium Industries PLC is a BOI-approved public quoted company specializing in the manufacture of high-quality aluminium extrusion for architectural, hardware, transport, and specialist applications. The company is the leader in innovation and design and is associated with several other extrusion companies worldwide, which enables it to keep abreast of the latest trends in the industry. The company’s products are manufactured to meet British and other international standards.

LAUGFS Gas brings global glory to Sri Lanka for Marketing Excellence at WLGA 2025

Kaspersky joins NITC 2025 as Gold Sponsor to strengthen cyber resilience in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.