SL to launch first Dedicated Sustainable Tourism Association in South Asia

‘Sri Lanka embarks on a journey towards a more sustainable and prosperous tourism industry.’

The Executive Committee of the Sustainable Tourism Association of Sri Lanka (SusTour) announced the above at its final meeting held on May 6, at Connaisance head office, Colombo. The committee finalised all preparations for the official launch in August of the first private sector led, non-governmental Sustainable Tourism Association in South Asia, as most tourism associations in Asia operate as dedicated Eco Tourism entities while this is probably the first in Asia.

This momentous event will be officiated by Prof. Ruwan Ranasinghe, the Deputy Minister of Tourism, who has agreed to inaugurate the Association in conjunction with a media launch.

Prof. Ranasinghe is not only a qualified academic specializing in sustainable tourism but also a passionate advocate for the development of sustainable tourism practices in Sri Lanka. His involvement is pivotal, as he has expressed his commitment to provide unwavering support to the Sustainable Tourism Association of Sri Lanka.

In addition to Prof. Ranasinghe’s support, Buddhika Hewawasam, chairman, SLTDA and Dheera Hettiarchchi, chairman, Sri Lanka Institute of Tourism and Hospitality Management, have also pledged their cooperation in the implementation of sustainable tourism initiatives through their respective state organisations. Their combined expertise and resources are expected to play a crucial role in shaping the future of tourism in Sri Lanka, ensuring that it aligns with sustainable development goals.

This inauguration marks a significant step towards fostering a sustainable tourism framework in Sri Lanka, one that prioritizes environmental preservation, cultural heritage and economic viability. The Sustainable Tourism Association of Sri Lanka is poised to lead the charge in promoting responsible tourism practices, ensuring that the industry flourishes while respecting the rich natural and cultural resources of the island.

Speaking at an exclusive press interview the Tourism Deputy Minister noted; “I am thrilled to see the private sector actively participating in the promotion of sustainable development, particularly within the tourism industry. This partnership is not just beneficial but essential, as it represents a viable mission that requires the joint engagement of both government and private entities. By working together, we can ensure that our tourism practices not only enhance economic growth but also preserve our natural resources and cultural heritage for future generations. It is through this collaborative approach that we can create lasting change and fulfill our commitment to sustainability.”

Adding to this collaborative effort, Australian High Commissioner Matthew Duckworth said Australia would continue its long-term support for sustainable tourism development in Sri Lanka. Australia has contributed more than 50 million Australian dollars over the past decade to sustainable tourism initiatives in Sri Lanka, including to support more sustainable planning, accreditation and skills development for this crucial sector. The High Commissioner confirmed that this support would continue into the future and highlighted Australia’s partnership with the Market Development Facility (MDF), which had recently launched a new initiative using data analytics to help Sri Lankan policy makers better understand how travelers discover and engage with destinations.

“Our vision is to create a platform where all stakeholders including product manufacturers can collaborate and share best practices in sustainable tourism, said Chandra Wickramasinghe, elected founder president of the Association. “We aim to ensure that tourism in Sri Lanka not only provides economic benefits but also contributes positively to the environment and local communities, he added.

The founders of STASL-SusTour believe that sustainable tourism is the ‘Future of World Tourism’ and is crucial for the long-term viability of Sri Lanka’s tourism sector, which is a significant contributor to the nation’s economy. By fostering responsible travel practices, the association seeks to educate stakeholders, including tourists and businesses along with manufacturers about the importance of sustainability.

‘ The association plans to launch various initiatives, including workshops, awareness campaigns and partnerships with local and international organizations focused on sustainable tourism, said Nalin Malwenna, newly elected secretary. Through these efforts, SusTour hopes to position Sri Lanka as a leading destination for eco-conscious travelers looking for authentic and responsible travel experiences.

“The establishment of the Sustainable Tourism Association of Sri Lanka arrives at a pivotal moment, signaling a commitment to a more sustainable future in the nation’s tourism landscape, said elected treasurer Dr. Samantha Pathirathne.

Trade, Investment and Tourism Cooperation Forum strengthens economic ties between Sri Lanka and Vietnam

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.