Tamil and Muslim MPs appeal to Saudi Arabia for clemency for Anojan Sivarasa

Sep. 28 (Daily Mirror) - A group of Tamil and Muslim party MPs has jointly appealed to the Saudi Arabian Government to grant royal clemency to Sri Lankan migrant worker Anojan Sivarasa, who is facing a death sentence in the Kingdom.

In a letter addressed to the Saudi Minister of Foreign Affairs, the MPs described Anojan as a “victim of circumstances” and urged the Saudi authorities to spare his life.

The letter said they had learned through national and social media reports that Anojan was facing the death sentence following the enhancement of his original sentence by a higher court, which had recently heard his appeal.

According to the MPs, the original sentence imposed by a lower court was five years’ imprisonment and a fine over an offence they said was alleged to have been committed against religion.

The MPs said they understood that there was scope for a final appeal before the highest court of Saudi Arabia.

They also called on the Sri Lankan Government to place before Parliament and the public confirmed information regarding the case, including the nature of the offence, the legal and diplomatic approaches taken so far and Anojan’s current situation.

The MPs said that pursuing a final appeal in Saudi Arabia would involve substantial legal costs that would be beyond the means of Anojan’s family, who they described as being from a low-income and underprivileged background.

They further appealed for consideration of Anojan’s conduct, saying he had immediately retracted a comment posted on Facebook and deleted it while offering an apology.

The letter said the MPs collectively vouched for Anojan’s innocence, or his “consistent pro-peace profile and conduct”, and maintained that it was not in his character to intentionally commit an act with the intention of disrespecting or offending Islam.

“We would therefore respectfully appeal to your Excellency to help spare this unfortunate victim of circumstances, from any form of punishment, and save his innocent life in the true spirit of Islam,” the MPs said.

They urged the Saudi Government to grant royal clemency to Anojan, describing the appeal as being in keeping with the teachings of the Prophet Muhammad and the principles of tolerance and empathy.

The letter was signed by several MPs, including Jeevan Thondaman, Rishad Bathiudeen, Rauff Hakeem, V. Radhakrishnan, Selvam Adaikkalanathan.