Amazing scene awaits 31st night revellers

I believe this year’s 31st night celebrations, especially in Colombo, is going to be amazing, and that’s certainly good news, indeed, especially for those who love to welcome a brand new year at venues loaded with fun, excitement and gaiety!

The area around Galle Face will certainly be a hive of activity, on New Year’s Eve, will all the five-star venues moving into top gear to give their guests something to shout about.

Checking out the plans that are being put into place to welcome 2026, I’m doubly sure ‘Dancing Through The Decades,’ at Cinnamon Life, is going to be a stunning success … let’s say ‘a dream come true for 31st night revellers at the City of Dreams!’

I’m saying this because two outstanding bands, a witty compere, and seven extremely popular guest stars, and a state-of-the-art ballroom setting, is what ‘Dancing Through The Decades’ is all about, and … yes, the plus factor is that legendary singer/entertainer Sohan Weerasinghe is working on making this 31st night happening a roaring success.

Sohan has been involved in the music scene for decades, and, with his band The X-Periments, he has ushered in the New Year several times, so he knows exactly what to do to create memories.

Being the Entertainment Consultant and Brand Ambassador for the City of Dreams, Sohan went into action, literally, months ago, working on his formula to make ‘Dancing Through The Decades ’the talk-of –the-town and he certainly has succeeded.

Sanjiv Hulugalle: The dynamic CEO of Cinnamon Life City of Dreams

What’s more, the CEO of Cinnamon Life, Sanjiv Hulugalle, I’m told, has given Sohan the green light, with a request that this year’s New Year’s Eve dance should be an unforgettable event.

Sohan says he has a super, efficient team from F&B, Sales, Banquets & Reservations, and Marketing, working alongside him, with Lisa Mendis, Director, Events, Sales and Services, leading the way.

He also added that he is truly happy with the response and is quite confident the dance will be a sell out as there is a huge expatriate crowd coming down from Sydney, Melbourne and Perth, and also from New York and London, for ‘Dancing Through The Decades.’

Let’s understand what a masterpiece is and how it originated

Where we stand, how Budget 2026 funds progress and what next

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.