Health, Public Administration Ministers with Ambassador Isomata visit JDR Medical Team Chilaw site

On 12 December Ambassador of Japan to Sri Lanka, Akio Isomata visited the field hospital set up and operated by the Japan Disaster Relief (JDR) Medical Team in Chilaw, together with Health and Mass Media Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa, and Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Local Government Minister Dr. A.H.M.H. Abayarathna. JICA Sri Lanka Office Chief Representative Kenji Kuronuma also joined the site visit.

During the site visit, Ministers and the Ambassador were briefed by the team on the ongoing medical activities. The JDR field hospital has been in operation since 4 December, and as of 11 December, has treated 923 patients in total from the local communities.

Minister Jayatissa expressed his appreciation for the team’s tireless and dedicated service and offered words of encouragement to the entire team of 29 professionals from Japan and 15 local interpreters working who supported the team’s operation.

Ambassador Isomata remarked, “I am glad to see the JDR Medical Team has been making substantial contributions to providing much-needed assistance in one of the most heavily impacted areas in terms of access to medical services. I would like to appreciate the dedicated efforts of each and every member of the team, and at the same time, thank the Health Ministry, the Sri Lankan Police and all Government and other agencies, as well as the people of Sri Lanka, for extending support to the team’s activities. As Sri Lanka moves on from the stage of emergency relief to the next phase of rehabilitation and reconstruction, Japan continues to extend its maximum assistance to the people of Sri Lanka in a seamless manner. Japan stands in solidarity with Sri Lanka based on the strong bond of friendship, trust and respect.”

Separately from the medical services provided by the JDR Medical Team, emergency relief goods, such as tents, blankets, sleeping pads, water purifiers and jerry cans, have been provided earlier through JICA to mitigate the difficulties of the displaced and distressed people in the affected areas, including Kandy, Matale, Badulla.

The Government of Japan remains firmly committed to supporting Sri Lanka’s disaster response and nation-building efforts in close coordination with the Government of Sri Lanka.