Sri Lanka-China Business Council holds 25th AGM

Seated from left: SLCHBC Treasurer Adheesha Salpitikorala, Immediate Past President Haroun Cader, President Sampath Kumara, Senior Vice President Chandrika Ranawaka, Vice President M.H.K.M. Hameez and The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce Manager Sayuni Tharumila

Standing from left: Rajeeban Arumugam of Acorn Aviation (Pvt.) Ltd, Anil Koswatta of Lak Aracade (Pvt.) Ltd, Damith Jayawardana of David Peris Logistics (Pvt.) Ltd, Bharatha Subasinghe of DPR Investments Consultants (Pvt.) Ltd, Rizwan Jowhersha of COSCO Shipping Lines Lanka (Pvt.) Ltd, Dulitha Ahangama of Abans PLC, Lushan Nalinda of Hayleys Agriculture Holdings Limited, SLCHBC Honorary Member Lasantha Wickramasooriya, Samuddika  Mendis of Hatton National Bank PLC and SLCHBC Honorary Member Ted Muttiah

The Sri Lanka-China Business Council (SLCHBC) of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce held its 25th Annual General Meeting (AGM) recently, marking a quarter-century of partnership and reaffirming its commitment to strengthening bilateral economic cooperation with China.

SLCHBC outgoing President Haroun Cader delivered his farewell address after two years at the helm of the council.

He reflected on the key milestones of his tenure, including the Sri Lanka-China Trade and Investment Forum, which brought together more than 100 Chinese delegates and a broad cross-section of Sri Lankan industry and the Renminbi Internationalisation Forum held in October 2025, which explored the wider use of the Chinese currency in bilateral trade to reduce the conversion and transaction costs.

Cader acknowledged the continuing trade imbalance between the two countries and called on Sri Lanka to identify more competitive export products and services while encouraging investment that creates employment, transfers technology and strengthens the local industries.

Incoming President Sampath Kumara, in his inaugural address, outlined the council’s future plans which include focusing on supporting the successful implementation of the Sri Lanka-China Bilateral Trade Agreement, sharpening business-matching efforts between the Sri Lankan and Chinese companies and attracting greater Chinese investment into joint ventures that combine Sri Lankan expertise with Chinese technology and market access.

The Executive Committee for 2026/27 comprises President Sampath Kumara, Senior Vice President Chandrika Ranawaka, Vice President Mohamed Hameez, Treasurer Adheesha Salpitikorala, Immediate Past President Haroun Cader and Committee Members Dulith Ahangama, Samuddika Mendis, Anil Koswatta, Bharatha Subasinghe, Damith Jayawardana, Lushan Nalinda Rizwan Jowhersha, Rajeeban Arumugam and Rakitha De Silva.

The council also welcomed Dr. Lasantha Wickramasooriya, Jay Ong, Chaminda Perera, Ted Muttiah and Prabath Harshakumar as Honorary Members.  The SLCHBC continues to play a critical role in fostering trade, investment, innovation and sustainable partnerships between Sri Lanka and China.