Sri Lanka’s energy future takes centre stage at Solar + Storage Forum 2026

GoodWe ranked as Sri Lanka’s No. 1 rooftop solar storage brand

GoodWe, a world-leading PV inverter manufacturer and smart energy solutions provider, in collaboration with the Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Authority (SLSEA), successfully hosted Solar + Storage Forum 2026, at Marino Beach, Colombo.

The event drew over 400 attendees from across Sri Lanka’s renewable energy sector, reflecting strong interest in GoodWe’s storage solutions and the country’s growing push towards solar and battery energy adoption.

The attendees included Energy Minister Anura Karunathilaka, Energy Ministry Secretary G.M.R.D. Aponsu and SLSEA Chairman Prof. Wijendra J. Bandara, alongside the senior government officials and industry leaders.

Speaking at the event, Karunathilaka said, “Sri Lanka’s clean energy future depends on a strong collaboration between the government, industry and technology leaders. Forums such as this play a vital role in fostering innovation, attracting investment and accelerating the deployment of renewable energy solutions.”

Aponsu added, “As Sri Lanka continues to increase the share of renewable energy in its generation mix, energy storage technologies and grid modernisation will become critical enablers.”

GoodWe Sales Head APAC James Hou said, “As the No. 1 rooftop solar storage supplier in the residential and C&I markets, GoodWe is committed to supporting Sri Lanka’s clean energy transition and the role of solar and storage in achieving the country’s renewable energy goals.”

GoodWe has been trusted in Sri Lanka for 13 years, delivering reliable products, localised service and continuous innovation. To better serve the customers in Sri Lanka, GoodWe has established a nationwide localised service network and an extensive dealer network; it helps ensure timely and efficient support for the customers.

With a nationwide service network, experienced local technical support, sufficient spare parts and free islandwide transportation for warranty replacements, GoodWe ensures a fast, convenient and efficient after-sales service.

As part of the forum, GoodWe showcased its latest residential and C&I energy storage portfolio, highlighting the company’s continued product innovation. The featured solutions included Lynx U G3 paired with ES Uniq, the ET LV series and Lynx A G4. Built around GoodWe’s innovative CoreLock concept, these solutions seamlessly integrate the battery and inverter into a unified, one-stop energy storage system.

The second edition of the Solar + Storage Forum marked another step in strengthening collaboration between the government, industry and technology providers, supporting Sri Lanka’s vision of a greener, more energy-secure future.