“Smell of Power”

The government hurriedly launched a social media campaign on Friday to gain political mileage out of the arrest of NPP MP Asoka Ranwala involved in a road accident. Its propagandists boasted that the rule of law had been restored, and everyone was now equal before the law. But they were left red-faced when Ranwala was granted bail soon afterwards. Worse, it was revealed that the police had not made Ranwala undergo an alcohol test immediately after the accident on Thursday night and waited until Friday noon to do so.

An otherwise articulate Police Spokesman ASP F.U. Wootler cut a pathetic figure when journalists asked him why no alcohol test had been conducted on former Speaker Ranwala immediately after the accident to determine whether he was drunk. The police have trotted out some lame excuses for dragging their feet. Thanks to their subservience to the ruling party, the police always have to defend the indefensible whenever a government politician commits a transgression.

An infant, his mother and grandmother were injured in Thursday’s crash. While the police are drawing heavy fire for the despicable delay in arresting Ranwala and making him take a blood alcohol test, the victims’ family members are demanding justice. JVP/NPP politicians are making various statements and pledges in a bid to obfuscate the issue and mislead the public, but to no avail.

The unfolding Ranwala drama, as it were, reminds us of an accident involving a JVP heavyweight during the Yahapalana government in 2016. JVP MP Vijitha Herath was arrested over a road accident where his vehicle went out of control and crashed into a wayside telephone post. He was subsequently released on police bail. The Judicial Medical Officer reportedly mentioned in his report that Herath had been smelling of liquor at the time of examination. However, the Colombo Additional Magistrate acquitted Herath of the drunk-driving charge in keeping with a legal precedent, but ordered him to pay Rs. 1,500 as state costs. Herath was also ordered to pay Rs. 17,400 for the damaged telephone post. Herath vehemently denied that he had consumed alcohol. The JVP was a partner of the Yahapalana government, in all but name.

Is it that the politicians in power and their kith and kin never drive under the influence of liquor and they only drive while ‘smelling of liquor’! The police ignore that smell. They take alcohol tests, if at all, hours after causing accidents! There are allegations of blood and urine samples being swapped to help the politically-connected suspects evade drunk-driving charges.

The JVP-led NPP has demonstrated that it has no qualms about interfering with the legal process to let its members off the hook in spite of its moral grandstanding and pledges to restore the rule of law. Head of the Retired Police Collective of the JVP/NPP, former Senior DIG Ravi Seneviratne, arrested for causing a multiple vehicle collision under the influence of alcohol in Colombo in 2023, had the drunk driving charge against him dropped after his elevation to the current position. The Police Department is currently under him; a fish is said to rot from the head down.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has taken upon himself the unenviable task of mitigating the adverse political impacts of his MPs’ endless blunders and transgressions. It has become a Sisyphean ordeal for him. Now, he will have to rush to Parliament again and try to control the political damage the controversy over Ranwala’s accident has caused to the government. He has to make damage-control speeches at such a rate that while sprinting into Parliament for that purpose, he might collide with himself coming out, as in a cartoon.

Upon witnessing the blatant manipulation of the legal process and the subversion of the ideals of equality and justice under the current dispensation, one wonders why JVP/NPP does not adopt the credo of the pigs in Orwell’s Animal Farm and declare that all Sri Lankans are equal, but those who are JVP/NPP members are more equal than others.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.