Eurus Power Solutions appointed  Exclusive Partner in Sri Lanka to  Beijing Sifang Automation Company

Beijing-headquartered company is a pioneer in automation technology and a globally recognised innovator in the field of power and energy

Beijing Sifang Automation Company VP/Senior Engineer Prof. Shu Liu addressing the event

Eurus Power Solutions, a leading power and energy solutions provider in Sri Lanka, has recently entered an Exclusive Partnership with Beijing Sifang Automation Company, globally renowned pioneers of power automation technology.

Eurus Power Solutions thereby gains exclusive rights to represent and distribute Sifang’s internationally acclaimed range of innovative products and services to catalyse the growth and development of Sri Lanka’s power and energy sector.

The partnership was announced at an event held at the Grand Ballroom at Galadari Hotel, Colombo, which was attended by an illustrious gathering representing Sri Lanka’s power and energy sector, including the Energy Ministry Secretary Prof. K.T.M. Udayanga Hemapala, and representatives from the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) including Assistant General Managers, Deputy General Managers and Engineers. A contingent representing Sifang’s Senior Leadership also attended the event, including VP/Senior Engineer Prof. Shu Liu, Manager of International Marketing Luo Nuo, Manager of Innovative Products Jikang Wang, and Senior Sales Manager of the International Business Unit (SEA) Frank Lee.

“At Eurus Power Solutions, our mission remains focused and clear; to develop Independent Power Producers, to engage in energy trading with the Ceylon Electricity Board, and to lead the way in power-related projects that bring innovation, reliability, and sustainability to the forefront of Sri Lanka’s energy sector,” Eurus Power Solutions Managing Director S.D. Samarasekara said. “This mission aligns perfectly with the strong legacy of Beijing Sifang Automation Company, and through this Exclusive Partnership, Eurus will be able to introduce innovative technologies and advanced solutions that will no doubt play a pivotal role in strengthening and modernising Sri Lanka’s power and energy infrastructure.”

Beijing Sifang Automation Company VP/Senior Engineer Prof. Shu Liu said, “Sifang is excited to launch our power automation products and solutions in Sri Lanka, and we are thrilled to partner with Eurus Power Solutions as our exclusive partner to the country. There is a growing market in Sri Lanka for power automation, driven by industrial automation, infrastructure development, and an increasing demand for smart home solutions, among other aspects. Together with Eurus, Sifang looks forward to contributing towards the advancement of Sri Lanka’s power and energy market.”

Samarasekara said, “We are proud to exclusively partner with Beijing Sifang Automation, and look forward to combining their global technological expertise with our local insight, to deliver cutting-edge solutions and meet the evolving needs of Sri Lanka’s energy landscape.”