Walls of Secrecy

The NPP government is busy building walls of secrecy. It has already erected quite a few of them around vital pacts and MoUs it entered into with some foreign powers. This is in sharp contrast to what President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and other JVP seniors asked the previous governments to do while they were Opposition MPs. They demanded that such agreements and MoUs be made public immediately.

The Opposition has called upon the government to disclose the contents of a defence MoU it has entered into with the US recently. After all, the NPP came to power, promising to practise good governance, which means a government or any other institution exercising its authority responsibly, transparently and effectively to serve the public interest while respecting accountability, the rule of law, participation, responsiveness, and fairness. The government has made a mockery of its commitment to upholding good governance by refusing to reveal the contents of all MoUs and agreements it has signed with India, the US, China, Japan, etc. Previous governments presented all pacts they inked with their foreign counterparts to Parliament.

Secrecy is antithetical to accountability. The NPP government never misses an opportunity to make a show of its mandate, and therefore it ought to respect the people’s right to know what it has committed the country to, through MoUs or agreements with foreign powers vying for global dominance.

India facilitated the NPP’s ascent to power by inviting Dissanayake and some other JVP leaders to New Delhi as state guests and conferring international legitimacy on them in the process, before last year’s elections. There is said to be no such thing as a free lunch. The US also did likewise, with its ambassador frequently visiting the JVP headquarters. The JVP leaders have indicated a desire to emulate China’s one-party model following a tour of Beijing. JVP General Secretary Tilvin Silva has been quoted by the media as saying, after returning from China, that the Chinse Communist party told him that a government had to remain in power for at least 15 to 20 years to implement meaningful reforms in Sri Lanka.

Foreign powers love to have neophytes in power in strategically located countries, for such leaders are easy to manipulate. The US and its NATO allies have made a cat’s paw of the Ukrainian government led by Volodymyr Zelensky, a comedian-turned-politician, to further their geo-strategic interests. What enabled Zelensky’s meteoric rise to power was a massive wave of anti-politics, fuelled by an effective propaganda campaign conducted through Western-owned social media platforms.

No government can remain in power forever, and its leaders have to face the consequences of their actions one day, as the experiences of the political leader both here and abroad have shown. The present-day leaders would do well to be mindful of this fact and act accordingly. JVP stalwart and Kaduwela Mayor Ranjan Jayalal is heard telling a CEB trade unionist, in a leaked audio clip, that the government is not afraid of killing and will not let go of power. The former also asks the latter to examine the JVP’s history carefully. It is hoped that the fate that has befallen ousted Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheik Hasina will serve as a lesson to the Sri Lankan politicians who think they can hold on to power no matter how. A special tribunal has sentenced Hasina to death for crimes against humanity.

Politicians take leave of their senses when power goes to their heads; they cherish the delusion that they are above the law and can act according to their whims and fancies with impunity. Let them be warned that not only the walls of secrecy around pacts or MoUs but also the well-fortified defences around the residences of rulers can collapse like the Walls of Jericho when irate people take to the streets.

It is imperative that the government present all the MoUs and agreements, signed between Sri Lanka and other countries under its watch, to Parliament without further delay.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.