National AI Awards 2026 calls for applications

National AI Awards 2026, ‘AI Amplified’, being the flagship recognition event of Sri Lanka AI Week, is now open for applications.

Pioneered by the Digital Economy Ministry of Sri Lanka, together with SLT-Mobitel, National AI Awards 2026 will be the most prominent highlight of Sri Lanka AI Week, uniting leaders and innovators shaping the future of artificial intelligence (AI).

Scheduled for October 04, 2026, the awards will showcase outstanding local achievements in AI in relation to industry, academia, start-ups and the public sector.

Furthermore, the accolades will champion innovation and honour national benchmarks of AI adoption and excellence.

The National AI Awards will also celebrate the minds, teams and ideas leading the transformation, recognising contributions which are revolutionising industries, redefining possibilities and driving national impact.

The accolades are to be presented in various categories including National AI Trailblazer Awards, Industry and Sector Excellence Awards, Innovation and Future-Focused Awards and AI Content Creators of the Year.

In recognition of top-level impact and leadership in AI, the National Awards include National AI Excellence Award, National AI Leadership Excellence Award, National AI Impact Excellence Award and National AI Export Excellence Award.

Celebrating AI transformation in key sectors, honours presented under Industry Innovation Awards will recognise groundbreaking AI use in Agriculture, Manufacturing and Industry 5.0, Banking, Finance and Insurance, Education, Healthcare and Life Sciences and Media.

In recognition of the next wave of AI innovation, commendations presented under the category of Innovation and Future-Focused Awards will include accolades for Best AI Start-Up/MSME Innovation, University AI Innovation, Best Agentic AI Solution, Women in AI Leadership, and Best Sinhala/Tamil AI and Localisation Innovation.

Recognising the growing influence of AI-powered creativity and knowledge sharing, the AI Content Creators of the Year (Individual/Team) award will honour outstanding individuals and teams using AI to create impactful, responsible and innovative content for five disciplines such as AI Educational Content Creator Award, AI Video and Storytelling Creator Award, AI Social Impact Content Creator Award, AI FutureTech Content Creator Award and AI Cultural Heritage and Tourism Content Award.

Aspiring applicants are invited to submit entries via www.aiexpo.lk/ai-awards and be part of Sri Lanka’s AI journey. Entries are open until August 15, 2026.