Sri Lanka Brand Conclave 2026 on July 28

Unites global expertise and local insights to shape future brands

Sri Lanka Brand Conclave 2026, which is scheduled to be held on July 28, at Cinnamon Grand, will place global brand leadership thinking at the centre of Sri Lanka’s marketing landscape, bringing together internationally recognised experts, senior business leaders and marketing professionals to explore how organisations can build stronger, future-ready brands in a rapidly evolving marketplace.

National University of Singapore NUS Business School Associate Professor of Marketing and Executive MBA Academic Director Dr. Prem Shamdasani will discuss the increasing significance of purpose-driven brands and how businesses can build deep relationships with consumers.

Marketing Leadership Institute CEO and The Marketing Leadership Masterclass founder Thomas Barta will explore how marketers can evolve from brand managers into leaders who contribute to the growth of their business.

Aleph Group Country Director for Sri Lanka and Bangladesh Md. Ehsanul Hoque will highlight new developments and trends in AI-powered marketing within Google’s evolving ecosystem.

The One Club for Creativity APAC Regional Director and former BBDO Singapore Creative Chairman Tay Guan Hin will address creativity as a strategic advantage in building distinctive brands.

Leaders from Prima and Spa Ceylon will participate in a panel discussion titled ‘Disrupt to Win – Creating Brands People Love and Advocate For’.

Senior marketing leaders from Singer Sri Lanka and Dialog Axiata will participate in the CMO Dialogue ‘How Brands are Leveraging the Modern Digital Ecosystem and the Evolving Skills in Demand’.

A Strategy to Action session will bring together industry leaders from CBL and Fonterra to discuss how organisations can convert brand strategy into measurable business outcomes.

Sri Lanka Brand Forum founder and Chairman Shariful Islam said, “Sri Lanka Brand Conclave was designed to connect our marketing community with global thinking while creating meaningful discussions around the realities and opportunities within our own market.”