Tourists to Hikkaduwa drop by nearly 80 percent as West Asian war exacts staggering toll

Hotels, home stays and restaurants in the popular tourist resort of Hikkaduwa are facing severe financial hardships as tourist arrivals have dropped by nearly 80% due to the absence of a long-term solution to US-Iran tensions, high airfares and other global factors.

Dickson Dewasiri, a member of the Hikkaduwa Tourist Hotel Owners Association, told The Island Financial Review that on average more than 70% of tourists visiting Sri Lanka patronize Hikkaduwa. “However, today we hardly see any tourists, and this is a very sad situation, he said.

‘Hikkaduwa is one of the most popular tourist destinations in Sri Lanka and more than 15,000 hotels, home stays, restaurants and tourist-related service providers operate in the area. Due to tensions in the Middle East, businesses across most hotels and restaurants have been severely affected, leading to the shutdown of many operations, Dewasiri explained.

Dewasiri added: ‘As a result, more than 100,000 tourism-related direct and indirect jobs are now at stake in the area.’

One of the Association’s active members, meanwhile said:‘Hotel and restaurant owners now find it extremely difficult to maintain their properties. Therefore, some entities have reduced staff and even introduced service breaks for employees.

He added that many staff members are highly trained and skilled, but some are now leaving the profession and entering other businesses to survive.

‘The exodus of skilled employees from the tourism sector will have a long-term impact due to the shortage of experienced personnel in the industry.’

Dewasiri, who also owns and operates Devasiri Seafood and two hotels with around 25 rooms in the area said that most hotel and restaurant owners are in dire straits as many property owners have obtained bank loans.

‘On top of that, operating costs, high electricity tariffs and taxes have increased, adding further pressure on the industry, he said.

He further noted that government support has not been sufficient to alleviate the crisis. Apart from that, hotel and restaurant owners are facing growing difficulties in repaying their bank loans.

‘Regarding bank loans, we are not asking for a debt moratorium, but we need some relief to repay or restructure our loans, Dewasiri said.

He added that the government’s main priority at this moment should be to promote tourism in regions unaffected by war-related tensions.

Dewasiri is a leading hotel and restaurant operator not only in Hikkaduwa but also in other popular tourist destinations, such as, Nuwara Eliya and Pasikudah, and is planning to expand operations to more areas across Sri Lanka.

MIFL records Profit Before Tax of LKR 818 million in FY 2025-26

How could a modest sea passage like Hormuz hold the global economy hostage?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.