What Bakeer Markar did for Beruwala

May 12 marked the commemoration of the 109th birth anniversary of Al Haj M.A.Bakeer Markar, who was considered the foremost son of the Beruwala community as he was the pioneer in the development of the Berwala town to what it is today. This account is a dedication to some of his services.

My memory is awakened on the extensive work done by him as a citizen of Beruwala for the town’s development. After being elected Chairman of the Beruwala Urban Council and later Mayor, it he who laid the foundation to develop the town from a small row of shops to what it is today.

At the time he became the first citizen of Beruwala, there was no major government building in the town other than that of the Urban Council which preceded the Municipality. It is he who initiated the process of upgrading Beruwala to the status of a separate Divisional Secretariat and the subsequent construction of many imposing buildings in the town.

At that time there were no shopping complexes, state banks or fisheries offices in Beruwala. Nor did it have a dedicated post office. The were no medical quarters as well.

From the first moment he was elected as a Member of Parliament, steps were taken to acquire a large extent of land for the development of Beruwala town. Accordingly, the Divisional Secretariat, the new post office in Beruwala, the Beruwala Youth Vocational Training Center, four medical quarters, the Beruwala Fisheries Complex and other buildings required for the hospital were constructed on acquired land. He had also acquired more land for the future constructions of the hospital.

Banks including the Bank of Ceylon, National Savings Bank, Rural Development Bank and others came to Beruwala under his leadership. The giant shopping complex that adorns the city of Beruwala was also built under his leadership, in accordance with the Beruwala city development plan that he pioneered. The Samoopakaara Mandiraya was built under his guidance on a land he acquired in his time. The telephone exchange too was built on such a land.

It was he who enabled the first two-storied building to Ariyawansha Vidayalaya for the educational purposes of the Beruwala community. Nearly 50 percent of the buildings of D.S. Senanayake Central College also known as Beruwala Central College were constructed during his tenure. The Education office, Meeting Hall and Century Building are some among them.

It was he who acquired the land for the playground of the Beruwala Central College amidst many objections and also constructed the two new buildings of the Roman Catholic School near the Beruwala Police Station. The two main buildings of Warapitiya School, the meeting halls of Gnanissara and Aluthgamveediya Balika Vidyalayas, the building of the Pambe School and the prayer hall of the Hettimulla Temple, the Munghena Century School building and the two-storied Duwegoda School, the Walatara and Kalavila School buildings, the Meeting Halls of Al Hambra Vidyalay Naleem Hajiyar Girls’ School and the two-storied building of the Roman Catholic School in Diyalagoda were among his achievements.

He enabled the expansion and development of numerous schools in the Beruwela area taking special interest in the construction of playgrounds for many schools within his electorate. At that time, water was brought to the shops in Beruwala town by carts. This water was sold to the shops. In some areas, people had to walk miles to get drinking water. He initiated the supply of piped water to all areas that came within the Beruwala electorate including Maggona, Payagala, Aluthgama and Dhargatown.

It was Mr. Bakeer Markar who proposed the inclusion of the areas of Beruwala, Aluthgama, Moragalla and Kaluwamodara in the Bentota Tourism Zone. It is no secret how the then Director General of the Tourism Board, Mr. Thahir, and a group of high-ranking officials of the Board opposed this decision by pointing out various negatives. But Mr. Bakeer Markar fought a lone battle to designate these areas within the tourist zone leading to the uplifting the economic conditions of the people of that area.

The people of Beruwala still remember how he took the initiative to establish several shopping complexes in his electorate with the involvement of the private sector. He also took the initiative to build a big shopping complex for the development of Aluthgama town, amidst the challenges faced in courts with regard to it. The Aluthgama Town Hall building was also built by him. The model village of Wellathuduwa, Aluthgama was built during his time. The Post Office buildings at Aluthgama and Beruwala (new), Maggona, Dhargatown, Halkadawila and the Beruwala and Payagala Telephone Exchange Centers were all built under the guidance of Mr. Bakeer Markar.

Mr. Bakeer Markar who became Chairman of the Beruwala Urban Council in the year 1950 (later Mayor and MP), built a housing scheme in the Massala area which is considered to be one of the first housing schemes to be built by an Urban Council. The fact that that housing scheme is still standing strong, better than the housing schemes built in recent times, reminds us of him.

Under his guidance, a large-scale housing program was implemented to provide shelter to many homeless people within the Beruwala electorate. A massive program to distribute land to those who did not have land to settle was prepared with his foresight and implemented in Beruwala during his time.

The by-pass road and bridge built connecting the Beruwala and Halkadawila areas as well as the by-pass roads and bridges in the Walatara, Akuressa, Warapitiya, Pambe areas, etc. were built during his time as were many sub post offices, and medical faciities and public buildings; so also providing electricity to 80% of the electorate. His services to his constituency were legion and the principals and education officers during his time, to date remember the support he provided to resolve the problems faced by schools.

It is impossible to end writing about the extensive service he rendered to improve the lives of the people of Beruwala, even after he became Speaker and Governor of the Southern Province. I am reminded of a statement made by Mr. Ronnie de Mel at Parliament about Mr. Bakeer Markar, “I really admire the manner in which he stood up against the power of the rich and affluent in his area…” (Excerpted from Hansard)

The service rendered by Deshamanya Alhaj M.A. Bakeer Makar for the people he represented, with vision, dedication and determination is a great example for those engaged in politics today. We in Beruwala will remember him with gratitude as an honest politician who did all he could for the people who placed their trust in him.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.