‘Tea industry largely spared cyclone damage’

Reports received by us from tea brokers, the Colombo Tea Traders’ Association (CTTA) and other sources indicated that, by and large, the local tea sector has been spared by the recent weather havoc.

The CTTA in their recent communications said that although Cyclone Ditwah affected parts of Sri Lanka, production, sales, and exports of tea continued without interruption. Clearly, the report said, the well established and highly coordinated industry network was fully geared to confront these issues. Production and sales continued with least disruption . While some tea growing areas in Uva, and the Central Province experienced some impact no loss in manufacturing capacity was reported.

Damage was largely confined to specific roads, resulting in temporary disruptions to transportation. Some key routes connecting plantations to the city have now been reopened and transport services are resuming normal operations. Harvesting operations are gradually returning to normal with access roads being reopened and temporary roads have been constructed to facilitate transport of green leaf to manufacturing locations.

The tea small holders we met said, although their production routine was affected, quick return to normalcy was ensured thanks to the established Tea Small Holders’ Association whose action ensured speedy return to normalcy. They reiterated production was near normal; and the dismal situation was now in a controlled position. They assured that such losses were minimal and could be recouped with minimum delay.

The CTTA further said the majority of plantations and small holder lands in the South of the island were spared cyclone damage. Harvesting, manufacturing and transportation activities are continuing as usual.

Trading activities at the Colombo Tea Auctions continue to be held although with a revised calendar. The tea auction previously set for the 1st week December has been rescheduled for the last week December. This adjustment ensures uninterrupted financial flows to the producers , including small holders, maintaining the momentum of the industry.

Forbes and Walker Tea Brokers reported a national tea sale average for November of Rs. 1137.22 ( USD3.89) which shows an increase of Rs.61.17 and USD 0.02 YOY. The total National Sale Average for the year 2025 ( to date) was recorded at Rs. 1,164.97( USD 3.88). a decline of Rs . 63.49 ( USD 0.17) against the corresponding year’s average of Rs. 1228.46 (USD4.05). The report further said all elevations recorded negative variances during the period January to November 2025 in comparison to the cumulative corresponding year of 2024 in both LKR and USD terms.

SLAF, Aviyana Ceylon partner to elevate high-end sports tourism with Eagles’ Monsoon Cup 2026

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.