Eyes aggressive route expansion across Europe, Asia and Africa

As SriLankan Airlines pushes to expand its fleet, Chairman Dimal Arandara has outlined a strategic roadmap to heavily increase flight frequencies to established long-haul markets while establishing a brand-new footprint in Africa.

Testifying before the parliamentary committee, he argued that the airline is currently constrained by a severe lack of capacity rather than a lack of market demand, noting that wide body aircraft would serve as the backbone of this future route expansion.

Arandara revealed ambitious plans to penetrate the African aviation market to serve as a transit hub for Chinese traffic, heavily leveraging Colombo’s geographical positioning.

“We are looking at new markets. Africa, because Sri Lanka is the shortest distance destination from China to Africa. We should look at Kenya, Addis Ababa, or Pretoria. We are studying this,” he explained to the committee, indicating that feasibility studies for these intercontinental routes are currently underway.

Emphasising immediate demand on key existing routes, the Chairman also noted the massive potential in East Asia, Australia, and Europe. “Looking at London, we can easily add another aircraft.

He added that the airline has the potential to run daily flights to South Korea and can significantly increase flight frequencies to China.

Chairman of the Sectoral Oversight Committee on Infrastructure and Strategic Development, MP Marikkar acknowledged the lost revenue opportunities caused by the current depleted fleet, specifically highlighting the lack of connectivity to major global financial hubs.

“For example, there is no direct flight to Shanghai. A large scale of businessmen travel to Shanghai, but their airline has direct flights while ours doesn’t. We understand that’s because we don’t have enough aircraft,” Marikkar noted.

Urging the leadership to act decisively on these lucrative routes rather than stalling, Marikkar pressed the board, stating, “You said clearly you can add another flight to London, another to Melbourne... study Paris and put flights... these are all profits.” (NF)