Aitken Spence continues its strong performance by recording 42% growth in PBT for first half of FY 2025/26

Aitken Spence PLC, a leading conglomerate, with an extensive presence across the region, recorded revenue of Rs. 40.7 billion for the six months, ending 30th September 2025, reflecting operational resilience across its diversified businesses. The Tourism sector accounted for 64.3% of Group revenue, while the Maritime & Freight Logistics sector and Strategic Investments sector contributed 19.4% and 13.9% respectively.

The Group’s Maritime & Freight Logistics sector reported profit from operations (including the share of profits from equity-accounted investees) of Rs. 2.2 billion, making it the largest contributor towards the Group profits in the first half of 2025/26. However, the sector recorded a marginal dip in its operational profits, mainly due to lower contributions from its equity accounted investees in the South Asian region.

The profit from operations recorded by the Group’s Tourism sector for the first half of the year was Rs. 686.1 million, an 86.5% growth over that of the previous year. Strong occupancy recorded throughout the resorts in Sri Lanka coupled with increases in rates were the main driving force towards this growth in performance. Hotels in the international markets, including the Maldives, also delivered a steady performance, although pressure from intensifying competition has somewhat affected the growth in occupancy.

The Group’s Strategic Investments sector recorded profits from operations (including the share of profits from equity-accounted investees) of Rs. 352.6 million. Within this sector, the printing segment delivered a robust performance with a two-fold increase in profits, reflecting the segment’s operational strength and market resilience. Conversely, the garments segment continued to face challenges due to ongoing global economic pressures affecting the industry. Despite these headwinds, the sector as a whole remains a vital component of the Group’s overall portfolio, encompassing the renewable energy and plantations segments and plays a significant role in the Group’s strategic objectives and future growth initiatives.

The Group’s Services sector achieved a profit from operations (including the share of profits from equity-accounted investees) of Rs. 577.0 million, primarily driven by the recently commenced BPO operations in Port City Colombo.

Indices drop as CSE trading fails to maintain positive momentum

SLT-MOBITEL becomes first in Sri Lanka to achieve fastest 5G speeds exceeding 10Gbps

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.