Harnessing national unity for economic growth

The budget for 2026, proposed by the government, has been generally well received. The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce praised the plan, with its Chairperson Krishan Balendra stating that “from a private-sector perspective this Budget provides stability” and emphasising that “with the steps that were taken and the discipline we have seen since 2022, Sri Lanka avoided going down the same path as countries that suffered years of high inflation and collapsing exchange rates. This budget continues that stability.” On the Opposition side, Harsha de Silva of the SJB, acknowledged that the government “has shown prudence in aligning with international financial institutions”, even though his party will continue scrutinising the human-cost of the measures and the absence of a programme to achieve economic growth.

The government’s deference to the international community with regard to economic affairs has been unexpected. Many analysts believed that given the party’s roots in Marxist ideology the leadership would adopt a more confrontational stance. Yet the opposite has happened. This adherence to the IMF’s prescriptions has brought two immediate concerns to light. First, the economic hardships on the poorer sections of the population are barely mitigated, if at all. The budget appears focused on preserving economic stability rather than growth or social justice. There is no meaningful tax relief and the tax policies are clearly framed to maximise revenue for the government rather than to benefit the people.  In a war or disturbed situation, the general observation is that businesses make money not the working people, which  the government needs to correct.

Second, the document does not set out a clear roadmap for how economic growth and production might be boosted in the short-term; there are no massive development projects mooted and nothing comparable to the Mahaweli River diversion or the 200-Garment Factory programme of earlier eras that improved infrastructure, like roads, water, and electricity, and contributed significantly to Sri Lanka’s rural economy.  The government’s priority seems to be in avoiding another cycle of international debt and bankruptcy, as occurred in 2021, a scenario no Sri Lankan wishes to revisit. Yet there is a danger. If the current level of economic hardship continues, frustration among the people may rise and generate the very mass-based disillusionment that pushed the previous government out of power. The government needs to move now into the next phase of its economic recovery programme by mapping out a plan not just for stabilisation but for real growth of the economy.

To promote growth, one of the pre-requisites is to unify the country’s multi-ethnic and multi-religious population behind the developmental effort. The government has made a commendable start by convincing all sections of society that they will be treated as equal citizens with no discrimination. In the past, the war and the ensuing political instability kept foreign investors away. Even though more than 16 years have passed since the end of the war, foreign investment has still not materialised on the scale seen in much of the rest of Asia. Among the many reasons for this reluctance for foreign companies to invest have been high levels of corruption which the government is tackling in an  exemplary way and bureaucratic delays, which, unfortunately, appear to have worsened.

But just as crucial to the country’s abysmal failure to attract foreign investment has been the failure to heal the wounds of war.  This is evident in the recurring sessions of the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) in Geneva. The government, therefore, needs to show the same level of commitment in dealing with the several UNHRC resolutions, notably the 2015 Resolution 30/1, followed by Resolutions 34/1, 40/1, 46/1 and 51/1 that the country has been compelled to deal  with since the end of the war in 2009. Unfortunately, the indications are that the government believes that following the IMF prescriptions is more important for the country than the UNHRC recommendations. The sense conveyed is that IMF outcomes are top priority while reconciliation obligations have been put to the back-burner with the engine of development working on half-burner.

During the budget debate the President spoke in a non-committal manner to the question of holding provincial council elections as soon as possible. The system of provincial councils was established in 1987 as part of the Constitution and as a solution to the ethnic conflict, giving Tamil and Muslim minorities a measure of decision-making power where they live as a local majority. When provincial council elections fell due in 2017, the then government deliberately scuttled those elections by starting to amend the election law and stopping half way. The conduct of the provincial council elections now forms part of the UNHRC resolutions and also of the European Union’s GSP Plus requirements. The government, with its 2/3 majority in Parliament, can expedite the process of amending the election law.

For economic growth to take place the government needs to assign equal priority to the reconciliation process, in the same way it is adhering to the IMF agreement. Just as strict compliance with the economic programme has impressed international financial institutions, so, too, would the systematic implementation of the UNHRC’s resolutions impress the international human-rights community and international investors alike while reassuring the minority communities. The government would be making a serious mistake if it believed that focusing on economic development alone would win the confidence of ethnic and religious minorities. These communities also need to feel sure that the government is seriously addressing the roots of the ethnic conflict and not simply managing the symptoms.

Recent surveys, such as the Sri Lanka Barometer, reveal that levels of trust among ethnic and religious minorities, particularly those living in the North and East, where the war was fought,  are ebbing and remain lower than in the rest of the country. Among the potential foreign investors are members of the Tamil diaspora, who might invest significantly in Sri Lanka if they are confident that their investments will be secure and that the government is serious about resolving the ethnic conflict. One representative of the diaspora, Roger Srivasan, a former President of UNP (UK) Branch, addressing a group of community leaders, last week, asserted that the Tamil Diaspora had an annual economic output of  anywhere between USD 50 billion to double that amount, part of which they could invest in the country if they observed a credible path to sustainable peace.  If the diaspora were, indeed, to commence investing in Sri Lanka in a big way, it would be a powerful signal to other international investors that Sri Lanka is politically stable and worth investing in.

A government commitment to economic recovery, with reconciliation, will mean not just improved macroeconomic indicators but deeper social cohesion, a broadened base for investment, and a more resilient economy. By investing in unity, as much as in production, the country will be able to tap into latent potential across all communities and regions. Economic growth, which benefits the majority of people in all parts of the country, does not emerge simply from fiscal adjustment but from reaching out to all citizens, ensuring they have a stake in national progress. It is not enough to stabilise the economy, the government must ensure that every citizen, regardless of ethnicity or religion, sees themselves as an integral part of the national endeavour.

In this light the budget and government policy need to reflect both economic and social-political dimensions. Projects should not only aim at GDP growth but also at healing the scars of conflict, empowering minority communities, and laying the institutions for power-sharing and trust-building to flourish. Only then will Sri Lanka be able to move beyond stabilisation into a sustainable growth era in which the full energy of all communities is harnessed, and where the benefits of development are genuinely shared. Growth will not come from positive fiscal balances alone but from overcoming the trust deficit, and building a sense of shared belonging, by providing decision-making power to those who, for decades, have felt excluded and aggrieved. By giving reconciliation the same central place as macroeconomic reform, the government will lay the foundation for economic growth that truly takes off.

Contributions of the Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka and its Future Role

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.