AIA celebrates Partnership Distribution excellence at Diamond Club 2025 in Japan

AIA Sri Lanka hosted the esteemed Partnership Distribution Diamond Club 2025 event in the city of Osaka, Japan, from June 11 to 14, 2025. This annual celebration brought together the highest achievers in Partnership Distribution From 18 markets, recognising their exceptional performance during the 2024 financial year. The event served as a platform to honour individuals who have demonstrated unwavering dedication to helping customers live Healthier, Longer, Better Lives.

Under the inspiring theme “Illuminate the Future,” the four-day conference featured a rich and engaging agenda where attendees participated in strategic business sessions designed to promote collaboration, alongside wellness activities that emphasized holistic well-being. A highlight of the event was the exclusive visit to the Osaka World Expo 2025 and the Forbidden City, offering participants a glimpse into future-forward technologies and global cultural showcases. Among the representatives from AIA Sri Lanka were Asela Lokuge, Assistant General Manager of NDB Bank Partnership; Amal Sampath, Assistant General Manager of Commercial Bank Partnership and Tony Gabriel, Senior Bancassurance Sales Manager of Commercial Bank Partnership, whose contributions and commitment to excellence earned them a place in this elite event.

The Partnership Distribution Diamond Club not only celebrated individual accomplishments but also reinforced AIA’s strategic focus on empowering its partners and driving meaningful innovation. By recognizing and investing in top talent, AIA continues to build a resilient and forward-looking Bancassurance ecosystem that delivers value to customers and stakeholders alike. Looking ahead, AIA Sri Lanka Partnership Distribution remains committed to nurturing excellence and shaping a brighter future for its people and the communities it serves.

DFCC Bank marks 100th Financial Literacy Programme for migrant employees

Agreement signed for Port City Colombo’s first Commercial Office Development

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.