Abanchy Ceylon expands into Kenya with the incorporation of Abanchy Africa

From left: Ghareeb Mazrui – Head of Kenya Operations, Anupa de Silva – Senior Executive Business Development, and Seth Manickam – Head of Africa Region at Abanchy Africa, and  Asker Mohemad – General Manager, Abanchy Ceylon

Abanchy Ceylon (Pvt) Limited, the logistics arm of Pink Eagle Holdings, recently marked a significant milestone in its African expansion journey with the incorporation of Abanchy Africa Limited in Kenya.

Abanchy’s operation in the area is the latest amplification of the Group’s presence in Africa, strengthening an international network and operations that began with the launch of sales offices in Ethiopia and Dubai in 2024.

The establishment of Abanchy Africa Limited signals an important breakthrough in the Group’s regional expansion strategy. Expanding the portfolio of Pink Eagle Holdings, Abanchy Africa Limited will operate as a fully-fledged logistics and freight-forwarding company, providing comprehensive logistics solutions to customers across Kenya.

Discussing the incorporation of Abanchy Africa Limited, Asitha Silva, Group Chairman and Managing Director at Pink Eagle, said “By establishing our presence in Kenya, we’re reaffirming our commitment to creating a resilient and futureready business group with the potential for competitive growth in new directions. Having established a presence in Africa, our goal is to deliver sustainable value and drive innovation by uniting bold, strategic thinking with a modern, global mindset to pursue excellence in innovation and performance.”

Serving as a strategic base for Abanchy’s broader vision, the inauguration of the Group’s presence in Kenya offers services covering sea freight, air freight, customs clearance, transportation, warehousing, and other related logistics requirements. Furthermore, in addition to bringing the Group’s capabilities to Kenya, the base will facilitate the expansion of Abanchy’s offerings across the wider East African region.

“By expanding our operation to Kenya, we aim to not only strengthen our international network but to build the foundation for a strong regional presence that combines local market knowledge with the international freight-forwarding expertise, reliable customer service, and integrated logistics solutions that our Group offers,” added Mohamed Asker, General Manager, Abanchy Ceylon.

Abanchy began its African expansion journey in 2024 by establishing a sales office in Ethiopia. With its new chapter in Kenya, the Group is not only expanding its diversified portfolio in new direction and ventures but actively pursuing growth along global pathways to establish a definitive Sri Lankan presence that delivers sustainable growth, empowers communities, and sets new benchmarks on the world stage.