Takes from Overseas

Surprise from staid BBC. Its director general, Tim Davie and chief executive of BBC News, Deborah Turness, resigned their posts on November 9. And as is usually the case now, in the eye of the storm is Prez Donald Trump. Not far behind is his Press Secretary, the very youthful, attractive and as we say ‘too much’ Karoline Leavitt – American political spokesperson who is the 36th White House Press Secretary, appointed by the person she so admires and makes no bones about. She has had many a verbal battle and opposition but continues in her post as said that she openly and reportedly admires Trump and adulation is what he seeks.

There was much written in the foreign press and announced over BBC News. I intend quoting Stephen Castle reporting from London in the NY Times of November 9.

“Two of the top executives of the BBC resigned abruptly on Sunday following a report suggesting the public service broadcaster had misleadingly edited a speech by President Trump that preceded the January 6, 2021, Capitol riot.”

This was a couple of days after The Daily Telegraph published details of a leaked internal memo arguing that a BBC Panorama documentary had juxtaposed comments by Mr Trump in a way that made it appear that he had explicitly encouraged the attack on Jan 6, 2021 Mr Davie admitted the BBC was not a perfect organization and had to be open, transparent and accountable. “Overall the BBC has been delivering well but the current debate around BBC News has understandably contributed to my decision. As director general I have to take ultimate responsibility.” Ms Turness echoed this by admitting she had to take responsibility for any mistakes made down the line below her.

On social media Ms Leavitt reacted to the resignations by posting screen shots of two news items, the first reading “Trump goes to war with ‘fake news’ BBC” and the second “Tim Davie resigns as BBC director general over Trump edit” with Shot over the first and Chaser over the second to which Ed Davey, Leader of Britain’s Liberal Party wrote “To see Trump’s White House claiming credit for his downfall and attacking the BBC should worry us all.” The latest is that Trump is considering suing the BBC for $1 billion as libel.

is to retire after 39 years in the US House of Representatives as after a distinguished career as San Francisco’s representative and the only woman to be Speaker of the House. “She wielded immense power and became a Democratic icon, while she was demonized by conservatives.”

She and Donald Trump had a running battle. He called her names like Crazy Nancy and accused her of being “corrupt, evil and did only bad things for America.” She replied with “vile creature.”

She married Paul Pelosi after being a co-student at Georgetown University and spent many years as a housewife bringing up their five children. Then she came into politics and never looked back, doing much good such as pushing Obamacare through successful legislation; steps to reduce climate change; improve infrastructure. Earlier on she moved very forcibly for the country to help AIDS patients, particularly teenagers, financially and otherwise.

During the 2021 assault on the Capitol her room was targeted and much destruction caused. In October, for political reasons, Paul Pelosi was savagely attacked and seriously injured. She was by his side for months during his recovery and convalescence. He is now OK.

She is greatly admired and almost revered. It has been recorded and said of her: “Some people go off and they talk about the way the world should be, but they don’t do anything to damn manifest it. Nancy Pelosi doesn’t go out to try to make points. She makes a difference.”

Alex Marshall reporting from the Booker Prize ceremony in London on November 11, in the NY Times, writes that when David Szalay’s short listed novel All that Man Is was judged in 2016, sitting through the award ceremony was a horrible experience for the author and the end was worse since he lost to Paul Beatty’s The Sellout. This year sitting through the ceremony was entirely different for him and his wife. His 2025 book, the sixth novel he has written, won the prestigious literary award. Author Roddy Doyle who chaired this year’s judging panel noted the novel Flesh was singular and extraordinary.

David Szalay, 51, Hungarian British author whose name is pronounced as Sol-lay, wrote previously about a sales executive who ends up stocking shelves in a grocery store; men in various states of duress; and the condition of man in modern society. Flesh beat novels by Susan Choi –  Flashlight, Kiran Desai’s The Loneliness of Sonia and Sunny, and three others.

Kiran Desai won the Booker in 2006 for her second novel The Inheritance of Loss at 35 years, while her mother had been short listed more than once for the prize. Her 2025 novel The Loneliness…. takes place between 1996 and 2002 and is about an Indian immigrant couple who meet on a train and progress to falling in love and getting married. It is described as “an epic of love and family spanning generations and countries and most ambitious and accomplished work by Desai.” She wrote after a long spell of hibernation from writing.

Memories of my time at the Bandaranaike Centre for International Studies

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.