Sri Lanka should eye real estate buyers hit by ME conflict: Realtor

The real estate market in the Middle East - particularly major hubs like Dubai has shifted into a cautious “wait-and-watch” mode at present with the regional conflict involving the US, Israel, and Iran continuing.  Security concerns and regional airspace disruptions have prompted international buyers and high-net-worth individuals to adopt a selective approach or look toward less volatile cities in other parts of the world.

A Colombo-based real estate brokerage said Sri Lanka should focus on capitalising on this opportunity and start extensively promoting what Living in Sri Lanka is and what owning a property here is all about.

“Dubai’s property market in particular sustained surge in recent years, driven by an influx of wealthy expatriates attracted by the city’s zero-income-tax regime and luxury lifestyle offerings. However, the regional conflict has unsettled investor sentiment and slowed demand across key segments. It doesn’t look a safe haven now. Not that we want problems to continue in any part of the world, but Sri Lanka can really use this opportunity and work on attracting some of these international buyers and high-net-worth individuals leaving or avoiding such territory.

“For that, the country has to be made attractive for the luxury market. It should be developed to attract the international hotel brands and the branded residencies. Here the government has to take the initiative. Starting businesses, real estate investment etc should be made much easier, taxation policies made clearer and infrastructure developed. Furthermore, 5-10 year visa structures should also be offered, so that foreigners can come in with friends and families and invest and live. It’s not just the real estate investment they do, they also start adding value to the economy during their stay,” 73 Avenue Realtors’ Chief Executive Officer, Director Arshad Mohideen told Mirror Business on the sidelines of opening its new headquarters in Colombo 7 last week.

He noted that investments are coming to new projects at present, especially because of Port City. “People like to invest in Port City, but still there is not a lot of clarity on how businesses

The company’s Director (Operations), Akram Mohideen in the meantime highlighted the importance of having a digitised system for real estate in Sri Lanka.

“If you look at Dubai, Singapore, Malaysia or any developed nation, all of them are digitised and have their systems integrated. People can transact very easily. That gives investor confidence to a lot of foreign buyers. The Sri Lankan expats keen on investing in our country are also used to these systems.”

“I lived in Dubai for almost six years, and have been transacting real estate there. I have been working with tier-one developers and multiple real estate brokerages. It’s so easy to do transactions on digitised platforms.  Sri Lanka needs to reach that level,”

As Sri Lanka’s property market continues to evolve and local investors increasingly explore opportunities beyond traditional asset classes and geographic boundaries, we believe the future of real estate will be defined by the quality of advice, experience, technology and relationships built around the property, the Directors opined.

73 Avenue Realtors, founded in 2020 by Arshad Mohideen and Akram Mohideen, has established a presence in Dubai and developed channel partnerships across Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom, creating a wider international network designed to connect Sri Lankan investors with overseas property opportunities while simultaneously taking Sri Lankan real estate to the global audience.