Private-sector employees to get online railway season tickets from October 1

Sri Lanka Railways will introduce an online facility for private-sector employees to obtain monthly railway season tickets from October 1, through the official seat reservation website.

The facility, which was previously available only to public-sector employees, will allow private-sector personnel who use railway services to apply for and obtain season tickets online without having to visit railway stations repeatedly.

The official launch of the expanded facility was held yesterday (8) at the Waters Edge Hotel in Battaramulla, under the patronage of Deputy Minister of Transport and Highways Dr. Prasanna Gunasena, with the participation of Deputy Minister of Digital Economy Eng. Eranga Weeraratne.

Under the existing system, passengers faced difficulties in obtaining monthly season tickets due to irregular procedures. They were required to first obtain a railway identity card by submitting an application, photograph, proof of residence and a copy of their National Identity Card.

They also had to obtain the service during a limited period, between 9 a.m. and 2 p.m., within a 10-day period.

Under the new digital system, passengers will be able to apply for and obtain their season tickets from home after their identity and user account have been verified.

Passengers can verify their user accounts at any railway station that provides seat reservation facilities.

The programme is being implemented jointly by the Ministry of Transport, Highways and Urban Development, the Ministry of Digital Economic Affairs, the Sri Lanka Railways Department and SLT-Mobitel.

The online issuance of concessionary railway season tickets for government employees was introduced on June 9, 2026, in accordance with Chapter XVII of the Establishments Code.

Officials said the expansion of the online season ticket facility to private-sector employees marks another step in the national programme to digitise railway services and provide passengers with a more efficient and convenient service.

Meanwhile, the Railway Digitalisation Programme has introduced a smart ticketing system for passengers travelling on the Kelani Valley Railway Line. The system is currently being operated as a pilot project at Baseline Mawatha, Kota Road, Kirulapone and Narahenpita railway stations.

The Colombo Suburban Railway Electrification Project has also contributed to modernising ticketing facilities through the existing online system.

The Railway Department has further introduced new digital services through the RDMNS mobile application, which provides railway news and live updates, as part of efforts to reduce passengers’ time and costs and improve the efficiency of railway services.