Cuba and the End of an Era: A Response

On 29 March 2026, The Island reproduced an article by founder of the Pathfinder Foundation, Milinda Moragoda, titled, ‘Cuba and the end of an era’.

In the article, Moragoda argued that the crisis faced by Cuba signals a broader shift away from ‘ideological defiance’ and towards ‘realism’ and ‘pragmatism’. He asserted that India now has an opportunity to ‘guide this transition toward a Global South that is pragmatic’.

There are a few gaps, omissions, and obfuscations in this argument that warrant a response.

First, Moragoda begins his analysis by attributing the crisis in Cuba to ‘structural weaknesses and the cumulative weight of external constraints’. The demotion of ‘external constraints’ to a subordinate clause is a sleight of hand that obscures the true hierarchy of challenges faced by Cuba.

What are the external constraints? The United States first placed an embargo on Cuba in 1960, prohibiting US exports of food and medicine to Cuba. In 1962, Proclamation 3447 expanded this embargo to block Cuban exports. In 1996, the Helms-Burton Act set a precedent due to its extraterritorial application, essentially punishing third parties for trading with Cuba. Since 29 January 2026, the Trump administration has instituted a naval blockade on oil shipments to Cuba.

These acts are in violation of the United Nations Charter. For 32 consecutive years, the United Nations General Assembly has condemned the embargo against Cuba. Cuba’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs has estimated that US sanctions have led to losses of over $252 trillion over the last 18 years.

The scale of the embargo makes the external constraints imposed on Cuba far more fundamental than its internal structural issues. An analysis that treats the external constraint as backdrop rather than primary cause of ongoing crisis is an interpretive choice.

Second, Moragoda suggests that Cuba (and Venezuela) ‘might have achieved more sustained development’ had they pursued US engagement, ‘as many in the region did’. No counterfactuals were presented, but I shall present some here.

There is Honduras, where a US-backed coup in 2009 helped produce one of the hemisphere’s highest murder rates and a subsequent migration crisis.

There is Guatemala, where the CIA removed Jacobo Árbenz in 1954, which remains among the most unequal and malnourished countries in the hemisphere seven decades later.

There is Colombia, a long-standing US strategic partner, which continues to record among the highest rates of trade unionist assassination in the world.

Perhaps, the most telling counterfactual is Puerto Rico. As a US territory for over a century – fully integrated into the US economic and legal order – it represents the closest available test of what sustained US engagement might have delivered to Cuba.

Puerto Rico’s poverty rate consistently exceeds 40%, being higher than any US state. A federally imposed fiscal oversight board holds effective budgetary authority and overrides the island’s elected government. Even without Cuba’s crippling embargo, hundreds of thousands of Puerto Ricans emigrate every year in search of economic opportunities.

These counterfactuals represent a pattern that a large body of development scholarship has documented: US engagement in Latin America has frequently served the interests of foreign and domestic elites while deepening inequality for the majority.

Cuba’s model has limitations, but it has delivered basic human dignity, under severe external constraint, that no other regional counterpart has accomplished.

Third, Moragoda presents the case of Vietnam-US relations as a ‘counterpoint’ to Cuba-US relations. It is an intriguing comparison that only works when one strips away all historical and contextual specificities between the two.

Vietnam, like Cuba, has a Marxist-Leninist ruling party; the mode of governance in both countries is what mainstream literature calls a ‘party-state’. Vietnam has not compromised an inch on its governance model and remains committed to it. It was able to achieve détente with the US as a strategic counterweight to China – yet even here, Vietnam’s ruling party maintains close, and growing, fraternal ties with its Chinese counterpart.

Meanwhile, the Cuban government has repeatedly expressed a willingness to reform their economic model. It is unclear whether these reforms would be as extensive as China’s Reform of Opening Up and Vietnam’s Đổi Mới – the point is that it is false to paint a picture of a Cuba that refuses to reforms.

Since 2021, over 11,000 private micro, small, and medium enterprises have been established in Cuba. The 2024 legislative calendar included reforms to wholesale and retail trade, taxation, labour conditions, and environmental regulation. Reform is happening.

What Moragoda’s analysis ultimately misses is that US opposition to Cuba has never really been about Cuba’s economic model or its domestic resources (Cuba is not really rich in natural resources). The issue is no longer even about Cuban nationalisation of US assets.

The cost to Cuba due to sanctions by now far outweighs the cost of the US assets seized during nationalisation. Moreover, there is far more money that US firms can make doing business with Cuba today, particularly in sectors like agriculture and pharmaceuticals.

The United States retains an ideological opposition to the existence of Cuba as a sovereign entity. It is the United States, and not Cuba, that refuses pragmatic engagement that could be mutually beneficial.

Fourth, Moragoda asserts that India has ‘both the credibility and the opportunity’ to guide the Global South in a new direction. It would be a fine and welcome thing for India to complete its modernisation and take its rightful place in international affairs – befitting the weight of its civilisation and the moral clarity of the Indian freedom struggle.

Yet recent developments pose significant questions about India’s credibility. India, which has presented itself as a net security provider and ‘shield’ of the Indian Ocean, did not utter a word when the US torpedoed unarmed Iranian frigate IRIS Dena in its ‘backyard’.

Nor did India raise objection when US warplanes bombed facilities near Chabahar Port in Iran, an area with significant Indian investment and strategic value due to it providing India a route to the Central Asian heartland.

As the current chair of BRICS, India has shown remarkably little initiative to diplomatically intervene or mediate between the BRICS members who are currently at war: Iran on one-side and UAE on the other.

It is welcome that Moragoda acknowledges in his article that ‘realism does not eliminate the need for dignity’. Indeed, this is precisely why Cuba has been a lodestar for the Global South for so long – as a consistent voice of dignity in the face of a ‘pragmatism’ that in practice often meant capitulation.

Dismissing this as ‘ideological defiance’ is rhetorically rich but doesn’t address the facts.

Let us return to the US: the reality is that the US has not really been able to achieve any of its political objectives in Venezuela and Iran. Leaders were kidnapped or killed but the basic social and governance structures remain. The case of Cuba is unlikely to be any different. US troops could try going in, but they will never get out.

The US resort to decapitation strikes is itself an admission of diminished military-industrial-diplomatic capacity. It cannot fight a ground war, it cannot supply an army, and it cannot build governments and institutions to replace regimes it does not like.

The US could ‘realistically’ and ‘pragmatically’ accept a changing world order, but it chooses instead to lash out and destabilise peace and development.

An era is indeed ending. The question is for whom? It is neither realistic nor pragmatic to go down with the declining hegemon. The credible leadership we need in our part of the world is precisely that which could restore a dignity which has been rode roughshod over. Can the present administration in India deliver that?

(Shiran Illanperuma is a researcher at Tricontinental: Institute for Social Research and a co-editor of the international edition of Wenhua Zongheng: A Journal of Contemporary Chinese Thought. He is a Visiting Lecturer at the Bandaranaike for International Studies.)

Thomian cricketers in Cricketing Hurrah at the SSC in Colombo, December 17, 2023

Aspects of Ceylon/Sri Lanka Foreign Relations – 1948 to 1976

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.