Gamini D’s dilemma in returning to UNP and CBK’s entry via WPC

The Central province is well known for its growing of spices like pepper, cardamom, cloves and nutmeg. They are grown in small household properties unlike tea, rubber, cocoa and coconut which are commercial crops grown in large estates in the district. After interacting with Kandyan villagers both as an official and a politician I became aware how important these crops are for the village economy.

The villagers are primary producers who sell off their produce to intermediary traders who in turn sell them to the bigger brokers in Colombo. This system is outdated and tends to give a bad deal to the primary producer-the villager. Often the intermediary dealer is a Muslim who has the ability to activate their commercial links with big time exporters in Colombo and earn large margins at the expense of villagers who are the actual producers.

With the expansion of the global middle class the demand for spices have gone up but we have not been able to exploit these assets due to a bureaucracy which is slow to act. On the other hand India – especially Tamil Nadu and Kerala are front runners in meeting global demand. This often leads to smuggling of spices like cloves and nutmeg to India because our products have a premium demand.

As Minister of Finance I often interacted with the Indian Minister of External trade, Kamal Nath with the idea of adjusting their duty structure to favour our spices on a preferential rate. He did so and it raised a furore in Kerala and Kamal Nath told me in lighter vein that he was blamed by the Indian Congress for their defeat in the local polls in Kerala because the local growers of spices and cashew had voted against them.

Since he was from Rajasthan, which was a state that did not grow spices, his voters did not object to the generous tariff concessions given to us. It was during this time that local spices recorded high sales and high incomes. Similarly during times of typhoons and heavy rains in Kerala when they cannot meet the demand for spices and cashew, our products are in great demand with the resulting increasing of prices. Traders tend to stockpile their holdings anticipating such a windfall.

The devolution of subjects to the Provincial Councils have been done in a haphazard manner. Many crucial areas which call for a high degree of coordination are badly affected by a division of responsibilities. Take for instance the crucial area of irrigation of which I was once the Minister in charge. Large scale irrigation works are a function of the center while minor irrigation works, which were earlier managed by a well funded Agrarian Services Department, have been handed over to the Provincial Minister.

Today there is a problem of both coordination and finance in this crucial sector. Rural irrigation has been neglected leading to a breakdown of agricultural facilities which in turn reduces output and pushes labour out of this sector. The ratio of agriculture’s contribution to GDP has declined continuously. So have the figures for employment in the agriculture sector which is now outstripped by the manufacturing and service sectors of our economy.

There are similar anomalies in the education and health sectors. While “national” schools and hospitals are better funded, their “provincial” counterparts are badly managed and underfunded. The public have a clear preference for “National” schools and hospitals. Why are the PCs institutions so underfunded?

It is because the Chief Ministers have diverted funds to duplicate their bureaucracy and promote popular but unproductive employment creation. The net result is that the PC system, at least in south Sri Lanka, has become a chaotic mess and another drain on national resources. New PC polls have not been held. But the public has shown no interest in resurrecting them.

With the unexpected deaths of Premadasa and Lalith, and the disappearance of Upali Wijewardene, the only charismatic leader of the old UNP left standing was Gamini Dissanayake. The departure of Lalith cast a heavy burden regarding the DUNF on his shoulders. Earlier leadership jealousies with Lalith vanished with the new burden of organizational and financial responsibilities that Gamini had to now undertake alone. It was a formidable challenge.

Coupled with that was the demand for him to return to the “Mahagedera” from the rank and file of the party who saw their strength diminished due to the split between the UNP and DUNF at the recently concluded Provincial Council elections. For Gamini who was a UNP stalwart the only hurdle he had faced was Premadasa. Now that the single obstacle was providentially removed he saw no reason why his earlier labours for the UNP as a national leader should be wasted.

There was another reason which was perhaps not so well known. Like many of our political leaders Gamini was addicted to astrology and soothsayers. He was a believer in Satya Sai Baba who had assured him that he would reach the top and had even given him a charmed ring which would help him on his way. Most Sri Lankan politicians are believers in soothsaying and rituals because it gives them Dutch courage to soldier on in a field which is full of jealousy and uncertainty.

Unknown to most voters hosts of palm readers and soothsayers descend on Colombo from India during election time. They are sponsored by Tamil businessmen and they make sanguine predictions thereby answering the growing psychological anxieties of our politicians. Among them Premadasa and Gamini were foremost and ironically both were killed notwithstanding the predictions of “God men” who assured them of a long and fruitful life crowned with success.

Many evenings of our leaders are spent closeted in seances with these self appointed messengers from god. Many of our leaders have hastened to South India to participate in an expensive ritual known as “Thulabaram” in which our “friends of the oppressed and down trodden” are weighed in gold. Of late gold has been replaced by bundles of cash, usually provided by Tamil merchants with business interests in the island. All these “God men” advised Gamini that his future lay in rejoining the UNP and claiming his political inheritance.

While Gamini was veering towards a move to rejoin the UNP several major obstacles remained. One was the cordiality that had developed between the DUNF and the SLFP as shown in the appointment of Chief Ministers in the Western and North Central provinces. Mrs Bandaranaike was very supportive of Gamini and the DUNF. I remember that we worked very closely with her during the “Fransisco” debacle. The Southern Provincial Council was captured with the cooperation of the SLFP and DUNF and Amarasiri Dodangoda-a veteran SLFP nominee was to be elected the Chairman. However as a newcomer to the UNP Anura Bandaranaike, in order to show his loyalty to his new found party, pulled out one of his acolytes named Fransisco who was a PC member of the SLFP thereby depriving Dodangoda of a majority.

This impasse ended up in the courts and joint affidavits had to be furnished by the SLFP and the DUNF to the judiciary. During this time Gamini and I consulted Mrs. B several times. She was assisted by Attorney Nimal Siripala de Silva. In the end the courts held with Dodangoda marking a sea change in judicial verdicts which were earlier often in Premadasa’s favour. It was an early sign that the monolithic UNP will have trouble under the Wijetunga – Ranil administration. CBK’s new found leadership was giving hope to the debilitated SLFP. As a result the majority of UNPers needed Gamini more than ever and many party officials would come “incognito” to persuade Gamini to make a comeback.

The incumbent President and Prime Minister, Wijetunga and Ranil, however were against the return of Gamini to the UNP. They were supported by Cooray and Choksy who felt that Anura Bandaranaike was enough of a crowd puller to need supplementing with an ambitious veteran who was currently in the doghouse. But the chief opponent was Ranil who felt rightly that Gamin’s arrival would mark the decline of his hold on the party. Many legal, technical and political objections were brought forward by the Ranil camp, particularly by Gamini Athukorale who had an axe to grind with Gamini the reasons for which were described in Volume One of my autobiography. They were not even on talking terms. As mentioned above, this conflict came into the open when we in the Central Provincial Council attempted to remove the Chief Minister.

The anti Gamini UNP leaders used all their powers to defeat this move and humiliate Gamini. Wijetunga was reported to have said in pithy Sinhala that “it was better to put a snake under your sarong than get close to the DUNF leader”. This was a trying time for us as both the UNP and the SLFP began to be suspicious of a major political shift engineered by Gamini. At the same time the SLFPers who had joined the DUNF like Monty Gopallawa were facing the prospect of being marooned as they had no wish to join the UNP since they were dedicated anti-UNPers right through their political careers. They argued for the continuation of the DUNF but they were in a minority who proved to be dispensable in Gamini’s quest for a power base.

The Provincial council elections brought CBK into the contemporary political contest with a bang. Her entry as the Chief Minister of the Western Province was like a breath of fresh air which helped the SLFP to settle their internecine conflicts and give them hope of winning an election after 17 years of UNP rule. Hers was not an easy path to the top. The Maithripala Senanayake and Anura clique, assisted by Mahinda Rajapaksa, challenged her all the way. At first she had to be assisted by comparatively junior party members like Mangala Samaraweera and SB Dissanayake who realized that a “new face” was needed to galvanize their grass roots supporters.

The old leaders like Maithripala Senanayake. Kalugalla and Sooriyaratchi who were behind Anura, had no hesitation in conspiring with UNP leaders in their attempts to block CBK. Their main obstacle was Mrs. B who stoutly backed Chandrika and thereby even alienated her favourite child Anura. It was a trying time for her which led to a stroke which later made her an invalid. But Chandrika brought a new “grass roots” approach with her own uninhibited style of politicking.

Her record victory in the Provincial Council election and the setting up of an administration with an alliance with the left and the DUNF highlighted the possibility of a new configuration in the anti UNP struggle. She also managed to win the confidence of the minorities and the support of India who looked upon Premadasa and Wijetunga with suspicion as being “anti-Indian”. She was crafting a new coalition of the left of which the UNP was now beginning to sit up and take notice.

This was confirmed when CBK led the anti UNP group to victory in the Provincial Council elections for the southern province in spite of the desperate efforts of the UNP which resorted to strong arm tactics like abducting Francisco. For the first time the UNP, and President Wijetunga, appeared to be nervous about their electoral prospects and there was a demand among the rank and file for Gamini which Ranil and Athukorala and their small coterie attempted to suppress.

But the wild card was Wijetunga who was being persuaded to think again about Gamini’s role in the changed circumstances. The UNP membership was not satisfied with Ranil’s leadership style which depended on a small group of admirers and was a far cry from the mass politics that JRJ and Premadasa had introduced into the party organization.

(Excerpted from vol. 3 of the Sarath Amunugama autbiography) ✍️

Susili Wilson (1928-2025): A woman of Stature, Strength and Purpose

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.