Former State Minister Anupa Pasquel’s salary, allowances, expenditure examined in court

Colombo, Sep. 3 (Daily Mirror) - Evidence concerning the income, salary, allowances, bank accounts and expenditure of former State Minister Anupa Pasquel has been recorded before the Colombo High Court in a case filed by the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC).

The Director General of the CIABOC has indicted Pasquel over allegations relating to the possession of certain sums of money in his bank accounts and accounts maintained by his wife, as well as expenditure which the prosecution alleges could not have been incurred from his known income during the period from March 31, 2022, to September 14, 2023.

During yesterday’s proceedings, Sarath Kumara, Director of Finance of Parliament, gave evidence and produced documents relating to the salary, allowances and other financial entitlements received by Pasquel during the relevant period.

During cross-examination by Senior Counsel Darshana Kuruppu, Kumara testified that the salaries and allowances received by Members of Parliament and Ministers during the period in question, including the fuel allowance, were subject to applicable tax deductions.

He further testified that Pasquel’s salary had been directly deposited into a bank account maintained by the former State Minister at the Bank of Ceylon Parliamentary Branch.

Radha Nanayakkara, Secretary to the Ministry of Social Empowerment, also gave evidence before the High Court and produced documents relating to the salary and allowances paid to Pasquel during the period when he served as State Minister of Social Empowerment.

The evidence of the two officials was led in relation to the prosecution’s allegations concerning Pasquel’s known income and financial transactions during the period specified in the indictment.

The prosecution alleges that certain amounts held in bank accounts maintained by Pasquel and his wife, together with certain expenses incurred during the relevant period, could not have been met from his known legitimate income.

Following the proceedings, High Court Judge Roshantha Godakawela postponed further hearing of the case until October 1, 2026, and directed that five prosecution witnesses be present before court on the next date for the continuation of the trial.

Assistant Director (Law) of the CIABOC Ishika Ranathunga appeared for the prosecution.

Senior Counsel Darshana Kuruppu appeared for the accused, together with Attorneys-at-Law Buddhima Kannangara, Rajitha Kulathunga and Sudarsha Silva.