Havelock City Mall celebrates two years

Havelock City Mall celebrates its second anniversary this October under the theme ‘Two Years of Smiles, Happiness, and Shared Joy’. Since opening its doors in 2023, the mall has evolved into a vibrant hub for fashion, dining, and entertainment, living up to its promise of being My Happy Place.

The anniversary celebrations will begin with a Tenant Awards Ceremony recognizing top- performing retail partners, and a Mall Staff Awards Ceremony honouring the outstanding contributions of Havelock City Mall employees.

Festivities will take place on 18 and 19 October, featuring discounts of up to 30% from leading brands, an International Food Fiesta, live music and entertainment. In parallel with the second anniversary celebrations, an exclusive loyalty card will also be introduced for Havelock City Apartments residents, offering them special privileges and benefits at Havelock City Mall.

“As we celebrate this milestone, I extend heartfelt gratitude to our shoppers, retail partners, and vendors for their unwavering support,” said Overseas Realty (Ceylon) PLC CEO Pravir Samarasinghe. “Together, we have made Havelock City Mall Colombo’s most cherished and joyful destination, truly My Happy Place.”

Spanning over 200,000 square feet across six levels, Havelock City Mall features a curated mix of local and international brands, with more than 130 outlets across fashion, electronics, homeware, health and beauty, dining, cafés, cinema, and family entertainment zones. Since its opening, the mall has set new benchmarks in urban retail and leisure, redefining Colombo’s shopping and entertainment landscape for Sri Lanka’s cosmopolitan community.

Over the past two years, Havelock City Mall has introduced several industry firsts, curating a diverse range of experiences that have redefined the mall environment in Sri Lanka. These include large-scale signature events such as the Elite Auto Show, CarniWOW family carnival, Checkmate blitz chess tournament and ‘Warna’ - the art festival that brought together leading artists and collectors. Each of these milestones has reinforced Havelock City Mall’s position as Colombo’s most happening and experiential retail destination.

Havelock City Mall continues to elevate the retail experience in Sri Lanka with the country’s first and only large-format IMAX theatre and immersive family entertainment zones, including the Wet & Wild Adventure Zone, Jungle Zone, Ocean Zone, a state-of-the-art AR/VR gaming arcade and also an outdoor dining space

performances and interactive attractions that transform the mall into a dynamic social hub, encouraging longer visits and fostering lasting emotional connections with visitors.