Roar Global transitions its creative division to Obsidian

Obsidian has officially launched as an independent creative studio, evolving from the creative foundations established through Roar Global’s former creative arm, Roar Media.

The launch of Obsidian marks a sharpened mandate for strategic brand building solutions in traditional, digital and emerging media that cater to increasingly complex and rapidly evolving markets. Obsidian builds on over a decade of experience in storytelling, publishing and high-quality film production, now consolidated under a distinct identity and well-defined strategic focus. The studio positions itself at the intersection of insight, creativity and commercial accountability, working with organisations that require disciplined brand thinking and measurable impact.

Industry veteran Aman Ashraff has taken over as the Chief Creative Officer of Obsidian, bringing extensive experience in leading creative mandates across industries and delivering impactful work that balances craft with commercial outcomes. “Creative today must do more than capture attention,” said Ashraff. “As marketing ecosystems mature, the importance of authenticity in the creative medium and its relevance to brands, their products and services is more paramount now than ever before. Obsidian is shaped to operate within that reality.

Over the years, Roar Global has evolved into a venture builder operating across platform ecosystems and AI-driven marketing technology, with its core mandate increasingly centred on building and scaling mar-tech ventures. This evolution ultimately led to the establishment of Obsidian as a separately positioned, and independently operating creative studio, with its own leadership, team, and strategic direction.

Roar Global Chief Commercial Officer Prash Balakrishnan said: “The transition of our creative arm to Obsidian reflects the natural evolution of the creative work built by Roar over the past decade. As Roar Global goes deeper with our  focus within the platform-led, AI-driven mar-tech space, it becomes strategically important for its creative practice to move forward with its own defined identity and leadership.”