Cyber thefts and political battles

Another scandal has come to light and made international headlines. The illegal diversion of Treasury funds amounting to USD 2.5 million, meant for bilateral debt repayment to Australia, to a third party, could not have come at a worse time. It has happened close on the heels of the launch of the National QR Payment Adoption Programme to transform Sri Lanka into a cash-lite economy. Although the two payment systems are vastly different, and risks are much lower where the QR-based payment is concerned, the fraudulent diversion of Treasury funds is likely to erode public confidence in online fund transfers, if posts being shared via social media are any indication. The digital payment scheme is the way forward for the country, and it behoves the government to take action to clear doubts being created in the minds of the public. A misinformation campaign is already underway, and it needs to be countered.

Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa has accused government politicians of making contradictory statements about the theft of Treasury funds. As he has rightly pointed out, it is clear from their claims that the government is still at sea, and instead of getting to the bottom of the fraud, it is trying to manage the political fallout from the incident. Some of them have even gone to the extent of bashing the Opposition. They ought to study the issue properly and speak with one voice. One need not be surprised even if the government propagandists concoct a conspiracy theory that the political rivals of the JVP/NPP masterminded the diversion of Treasury funds.

What one gathers from the government politicians’ different claims is that cyber criminals gained unauthorised access to the computer system of the External Resources Department (ERD) within the Finance Ministry through emails. They altered payment instructions, redirecting the funds to unauthorised accounts. There has been no system level hacking, according to cyber security experts. It defies comprehension why the ERD officials have not been trained to handle situations of this nature, which are not uncommon in the digital space. Even ordinary people double-check account details before transferring funds. A telephone call to the Australian creditor that was to receive funds from the Sri Lanka Treasury would have helped save USD 2.5 million.

The Opposition politicians are no better. They are also making various claims that are contradictory, and some of them have betrayed their ignorance of the issue. Most of them do not seem to know the difference between the functions of the Treasury and those of the Central Bank. They are only making the public even more confused by expressing opinions and making allegations to gain political mileage. Among them are lawmakers. They ought to be educated on the duties and functions of the Finance Ministry/Treasury and the Central Bank. What they will come out with in case of a parliamentary debate being held on the Treasury payment scam is anyone’s guess.

What needs to be done now is to ensure that the illegal fund diversion is probed thoroughly and the stolen money recovered forthwith while action is taken to prevent the repetition of such incidents. Political battles will not serve the country’s interests.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.