U.S. maritime chiefs to visit Sri Lanka

U.S. EMBASSY IN SRI LANKA - U.S. Federal Maritime Commission (FMC) Chairman Laura DiBella and FMC Commissioner Robert J. Harvey will visit Sri Lanka September 6–10 to advance U.S.-Sri Lanka cooperation on maritime trade, investment, and the shipping networks connecting American businesses and consumers to markets across the Indo-Pacific. During her visit, Chairman DiBella and Commissioner Harvey will meet with senior Sri Lankan government and maritime leaders. Chairman DiBella will deliver remarks at the 8th Colombo International Maritime and Logistics Conference and Commissioner Harvey will serve on a panel.

“Over 80 percent of the containers moving through Colombo continue on to destinations around the world—a remarkable illustration of Sri Lanka’s role at the heart of Indian Ocean shipping,” said U.S. Ambassador to Sri Lanka Eric Meyer. “Chairman DiBella’s visit recognizes the importance of that role and provides an opportunity to deepen our cooperation with the people and institutions that keep this vital trade moving across the Indo-Pacific. Secure and efficient shipping creates opportunities for American businesses, strengthens Sri Lanka’s position as a regional hub, and supports prosperity in both our economies.”

Established in 1961, the Federal Maritime Commission is the independent federal agency responsible for regulating the U.S. international ocean transportation system for the benefit of U.S. exporters, importers, and consumers. The FMC works to promote a competitive and reliable international ocean transportation system and protect the American public from unfair or deceptive practices in the shipping industry.

Chairman DiBella has led the Federal Maritime Commission since January 2026 following her nomination by President Donald J. Trump. Commissioner Harvey was sworn in as a Commissioner on June 1, 2026, following his nomination by President Donald J. Trump.

Chairman Laura DiBella of Florida was nominated by President Trump on September 3, 2025, to serve on the Federal Maritime Commission for a term expiring on June 30, 2028. The United States Senate confirmed her nomination on December 18, 2025, and she was sworn in on January 6, 2026. President Donald J. Trump designated Laura DiBella to serve as Chairman of the Federal Maritime Commission on January 28, 2026.

Chairman DiBella previously served as Florida’s first female Secretary of Commerce, President and CEO of Enterprise Florida, and President of Business Development at the Florida Department of Commerce where she was tasked with maintaining and improving Florida’s $1.5 trillion economy. Most recently, before joining the Federal Maritime Commission, Chairman DiBella worked as a government affairs advisor for Adams and Reese LLP.

Her career in the maritime industry began after being asked to temporarily stand-in as Port Director of the Port of Fernandina Ocean Highway and Port Authority in 2017 while heading up local economic development in Nassau County, Florida. After a two-and-a-half-year tenure with the port, along with an introduction to the Florida Harbor Pilots Association, Chairman DiBella earned her role as the first-ever full time Executive Director in November 2019. In these positions, Chairman DiBella oversaw the implementation of port improvement projects and worked with state and private organizations to enact legislation and policies to bolster and protect commerce at Florida’s seaports.

Chairman DiBella earned her Bachelor of Science in Human Resource Management with a concentration in Business Administration and Management from the University of Florida. She is an avid distance runner, having completed the original six world marathon majors and holds the record for the number of overall female winner titles for the world famous 7 Mile Bridge Run in the Florida Keys.

Commissioner Robert J. Harvey, of Florida, was nominated by President Trump on September 3, 2025, to serve on the Federal Maritime Commission for a term expiring on June 30, 2029. The United States Senate confirmed his nomination on May 18, 2026, and he was sworn in on June 1, 2026.

Commissioner Harvey previously served as the President & Executive Director of the Florida Opportunity Fund, a not-for-profit corporation investing in Florida based start-up companies in life sciences, information technology, advanced manufacturing, aviation and aerospace, homeland security and defense, as well as other technology sectors strategic to Florida.

He also served as the Executive Director of the Florida Development Finance Corporation, the statewide conduit issuer created by the legislature to issue tax-exempt and taxable bonds for the purpose of promoting economic development throughout Florida. Prior to these positions he was the General Counsel at Enterprise Florida, the principal economic development organization for the State of Florida.

He has also served as a partner at several law firms over his career, specializing in securities litigation, arbitration, and regulation. Through these senior legal and business roles, Commissioner Harvey has gained valuable experience in navigating and managing public-private partnerships to promote economic growth.

A U.S. Navy veteran and former Special Assistant U.S. Attorney, Commissioner Harvey’s maritime career began when he served as a Lieutenant Commander in the Judge Advocate General’s Corps, providing legal counsel on military justice, administrative law, federal law enforcement, and naval law.

Commissioner Harvey has a strong interest in the international law of the sea, including freedom of navigation and the right of innocent passage. He is also focused on emerging maritime technologies, including quantum maritime solutions in such areas as route and fleet optimization, sensing and navigation, cybersecurity, secure communications, and predictive maintenance and environmental modeling.

Commissioner Harvey earned his B.S. in Business Administration from Eastern Illinois University, and his J.D. from Southern Illinois University School of Law. Born and raised in Joliet, Illinois, Robert, and his wife Debra hail from Palm Beach Gardens, Florida.