Royal emerge unbeaten champions in U-20 All Island Hockey; Stefan, Savain excel

Colombo, June 13 (Daily Mirror) - Royal College, Colombo, emerged unbeaten champions in the All Island Under-20 Hockey tournament, beating defending champions St. Thomas College, Matale in a nail-biting sudden death penalty strokes held at Rajarata University Ground, Mihintale on Wednesday (May 27).

The final ended in a 1-1 draw after Royal equalised the STC Matale lead five minutes before the final whistle.

After the penalty strokes ended in a 4-4 draw, the umpires decided to go for a single series penalty stroke, in which the Reid Avenue team won in the second single series penalty stroke.

Royal goalkeeper Stefan Anthonypillai’s superb saving with the stick on to his right side and Rumal Jayasinghe’s goal helped the Royal to become champions in the Under-20 tournament for the first time in the history since the tourney was started in 2014.

Throughout the tournament Royal’s centre forward Savain Karunasiri scored goals for the team, including both in the semi-final and final, while goalkeeper Anthonypillai well guarded the post throughout the seven games.

Royal were the runners-up when the same tournament was held in Matale last year.

The Colombo boys consistently performed from the first game despite an uneven grassy pitch not suitable for modern speedy hockey.

They beat Christ Church College, Matale by 2-0, their arch rivals S. Thomas College Mount Lavinia by a solitary goal, Kingswood College, Kandy by 2-0, and Maris Stella College, Negombo by 2-1 in the group stage games.

In the quarter final, Coach Damith Panditharatne’s team won against the much-fancied Dharmathutha College, Badulla by 2-0.

Later, they beat St. Joseph Vaz College, Wennappuwa, by a solitary goal, playing a defensive game against aggressively attacking Puttalam boys.

In the other semi-final STC Matale won against skilled Trinity College team by 3-1. In the playoff game, Joseph Vaz won against Trinity by 1-0.

Royal Coach Panditharatne’s five-year training, focusing more on stamina and skills, played a crucial role in the victory. Royal won an Under-20 national level tournament for the first time since 2017, the year they won the National Schools Games.

Panditharatne, a former national and Air Force sticker as well as Sri Lanka Police coach, paid attention on the weaknesses of individual players for the team to succeed. The former player from Christ Church, Matale has been coaching Royal since 2022 backed by Royal College Hockey Club (RCHC) consisting past Royal hockey players.

Royal Goal keeper Stefan was adjudged best goal keeper of the tournament. Royal team also was adjudged Most Disciplined Team of the tournament.