Premadasa method still in practice?

Why should ceremonies ever be held with the participation of politicians and public officials to mark the opening of projects carried out with state funds? Why should precious state funds be wasted on such events? These are some of the questions the JVP/NPP rightly asked about wasteful practices that the members of the previous governments indulged in while it was in the Opposition. The JVP/NPP leaders vowed that if voted into power they would never hold such events and end the practice of plaques being put up with politicians’ names thereon. Their pledge struck a responsive chord with the public, who voted for them overwhelmingly, enabling them to savour power. It was thought that the NPP government would put an end to the expensive ‘opening culture’.

But today the NPP government does exactly as its predecessors did; its members hold ceremonies even to mark the opening of public taps and bus halts. It has been reported that some government politicians ceremonially opened what is described as a smart bus stop in Dankotuwa recently. The bus shelter has been constructed at a cost of Rs. 700,000, we are told. The NPP politicians seem to have taken Machiavelli’s advice on promises to heart—‘the promise given was a necessity of the past and the word broken is a necessity of the present’. Expediency has a corrosive effect on principles, and politicians conveniently forget the promises they make to dupe the public.

Media reports about the Dankotuwa bus halt reminds us of how the late President Ranasinghe Premadasa wanted things done. Former MP Hudson Samarasinghe once said during a radio programme that President Premadasa had advised him to ensure that everything that was done for the people received maximum possible publicity. He said Premadasa had said the tills in shrines were made of metal for a purpose; when someone put a coin into it, others could hear the sound of it. All successors of President Premadasa emulated him in every possible way, especially where his craving for publicity is concerned. One may recall that the grand opening of the Hambantota Port during the Mahinda Rajapaksa government had countless dancers, and it cost the public an arm and a leg. The same is true of all other projects, big or small, carried out by other governments. In the pre-Internet era, posters announcing the opening of a project would appear all over the country.

The wasteful practice of the Heads of State travelling extensively all over the country, attending opening ceremonies or laying foundation stones, continues. Politicians seem to think that unless they are seen at such events, they may not be able to garner favour with the public and win elections. The NPP leaders are sighted in all parts of the country, unveiling plaques and laying foundation stones.

Going by the manner in which the members of the incumbent government seek publicity even for minor projects, one wonders whether they are following the Premadasa method, as it were, to gain political mileage.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.