Keeri Samba shortage not a national issue

Keeri Samba is very much in the news, these days. It is not readily available for sale in the market, but retail traders claim millers offer it to them at Rs.320/- per kg, when the maximum retail price fixed by the government is Rs.260/-. Hence they cannot legally sell at this price without risking prosecution. Millers have no problem with price control regulations which don’t apply to them.

Dr.M.P.Dhanapala,Retired Director, Rice Research & Development Institute,Batalagoda Late Dr.Tissa Rajapaksa, Rice Breeder responsible for BG 360(Keeri Samba) and Retired Senior Scientist, Plant Genetic Resources Centre, Gannoruwa

As an agriculturist and retired Agriculture Department officer, I was naturally curious to find out what the actual situation is. I consulted my friend and former colleague, Dr, M.P.Dhanapala (Dhane), an award winning rice breeder who retired as Director, Rice Research & Development Institute, Batalagoda, He is perhaps the last link to our legendary rice breeders.

Dhane, as a regular Keeiri Samba consumer affected by the current shortage, was aware of the issue. He reminded me that it was the late Dr.Tissa Rajapaksa, the reputed rice breeder who produced BG 360 (later named as ‘Keeri Samba’ by rice millers) who developed this variety in the mid-1980s. It was released only in 1996 when quality considerations were gathering importance. Rice breeders who previously focused on productivity (yield per acre) were introducing high quality characteristics into varieties bred for productivity. Such interventions unavoidably led to reduced productivity. Despite moderate yields, Keeri Samba had good cooking and eating qualities (palatability) and developed a niche market for itself.

Dhane said that there is no close substitute for BG 360 even among Indian rice varieties and the perceived view that the Indian GR 11, could be considered as a substitute was not really so. He attributed the current shortage of Keeri Samba to market manipulation by millers saying the demand for this variety was from a limited market segment. There was a good mix of rice varieties presently available to choose from, he said. Keeri Samba cultivation in Yala 2025 was 8.8% of the total extent of cultivation and the present shortage was not a matter of great concern as suggested by the media. I have seen some shops selling what they called “Rata (imported) Keeri Samba” – a name that does not formally exist – with physical grain characteristics similar to BG 360 (Keeri Samba) saying it was imported from India.

In my view too, as Keeri Samba constitutes less than 10 % of the cultivated extent of rice, which points to the fact it is not of much relevance to the rice consumers at large, and the current lack of it in the market (due to manipulation) need not be a matter of national concern. It is rational to let market forces operate regarding the price of this variety without government intervening by fixing a maximum retail price (MRP). This is what prevails in the case of Suduru Samba, Kurulu Thudu, Heenati, Basmati etc. plus many other such rice varieties where there is no MRP. Their prices are determined by the interplay of supply and demand locally.

Dhane agrees with me on this and says that it is best to remove the price control for Keeri Samba which occupies a minor share in the total national demand for rice and observe subsequent developments over a reasonable period of time.

Media reports indicate that the government intends to observe market development regarding Keeri Samba, and if necessary import about 40,000 mt of the Indian rice variety GR11 for delivery here by December 2025. It has since been reported that the decision to import had been taken. At a time when local rice production is sufficient to meet the overall demand, without any deficit, this move is definitely not desirable and it could even adversely affect the local rice market unnecessarily.

Let me conclude by thanking my good friend Dr.Dhanapala, who provided valuable information and his expert opinion as a successful rice breeder enabling me to write this letter. Let us hope that saner counsel will prevail among the relevant policy makers and avoid “making a mountain out of a mole hill”, in this instance.

Gamini D’s dilemma in returning to UNP and CBK’s entry via WPC

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.