Cargills adopts Crow Island Beach in partnership with Clean Ocean Force Lanka

Cargills Food and Beverage Ltd. through its brands KIST and Knuckles, has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Clean Ocean Force Lanka (COF) to adopt Crow Island Beach for one year, reinforcing its commitment to long-term coastal conservation in Sri Lanka.

This pioneering initiative is designed to protect and preserve the coastal environment through several key measures, including the removal of plastic and other pollutants from the beach and surrounding coastal area. As part of the adoption programme, the beach will be maintained daily with the support of dedicated beach caretakers, while also supporting their livelihoods by providing meaningful income opportunities.

Marking the partnership and in celebration of World Recycling Day, a coastal clean-up programme was conducted at Crow Island Beach to remove plastic and other manmade pollutants. Volunteers from Cargills, Clean Ocean Force Lanka, the Interact Club of Colombo, the Colombo Municipal Council and the Women’s Force of COF Negombo (Sri Vimukthi Association) participated in the clean-up with support from the Marine Environment Protection Authority (MEPA), the Sri Lanka Police Environmental Division and the Ministry of Local Government and Environment as well as the Crow Island Beach Park Society.

Jerome Fernando, Chairman & Co-founder of Clean Ocean Force Lanka said that, “Marine & Coast Conservation demands a unified front. Our unique Public-Private-People Partnership model is the cornerstone of our mission, and today, we are thrilled to welcome Cargills (Ceylon) PLC as a vital partner in this journey adopting the Crow Island Beach for the next one year. This collaboration will not only amplify our efforts to eliminate plastic and manmade pollutants from our beaches, but also reinforce our commitment to empowering marginalized communities through sustainable livelihood opportunities. Cargills’ deep-rooted dedication to environmental sustainability and community wellbeing perfectly aligns with our vision.”

Jagath Gunasekara, General Manager of MEPA added, “The Marine Environment Protection Authority consistently promotes active private sector engagement in marine and coastal conservation, as well as pollution control initiatives. This approach aligns closely with our Beach Caretaker Programme. We are pleased to collaborate with Cargills (Ceylon) PLC in the adoption of Crow Island Beach through our long-standing partnership with Clean Ocean Force Lanka.”

During the event, Knuckles also launched Sri Lanka’s first tethered bottle cap, introducing a packaging innovation aimed at improving plastic waste management and supporting recycling efforts. The tethered cap is designed to remain attached to the bottle after opening, reducing the likelihood of caps being discarded separately. Bottle caps are among the most commonly littered plastic items globally and frequently enter landfills and waterways due to their small size and low collection rates.

Speaking on the initiative, Arjuna Kumarasinghe, Managing Director of Cargills Food & Beverage Ltd., said, “Cargills has always believed in taking responsibility for the communities and environments around us. By adopting Crow Island Beach, we’re able to work closely with our partners and local volunteers to protect this part of our coastline. Launching the tethered bottle cap is another way we’re addressing plastic waste and making recycling easier for everyone.”

Pan Asia Bank empowers export sector as Strategic Partner of NCE Export Awards

CBSL adopts cautious stance in the face of economic uncertainties

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.