Gold fever sends some vintage luxury watches to the melting furnace

(Reuters) - Omega's Constellation watch has been flashed in campaigns, movies and at the Met Gala by stars like George Clooney and ​Nicole Kidman, turning it into a symbol of luxury and glamour.

But with gold prices near record highs struck in January, some such classic watches are being melted ‌down as the value of their metal content outstrips their resale worth.

Used models by the likes of Omega and LVMH's TAG Heuer are most hit by the trend, according to Reuters interviews with over a dozen traders, industry experts, and investment advisers.

British dealer Jon White of Gold Traders melted down an 18-carat late-1970s Constellation in excellent condition in May, one of dozens of mainstream luxury watches he has had scrapped this year as demand for ​investment gold has risen.

"Beautiful watch. But in reality, had the customer consigned that to auction, what would they have achieved?" White, who also manages an auction house, told Reuters.

The ​gold content of the Constellation watch, one of many models produced by Swatch-owned , Omega, was worth £5,750 ($7,749), 35% more than its estimated £4,000-4,500 auction value, White ⁠said.

James Lamdin, founder of Watches of Switzerland's second-hand unit Analog Shift, said melting was "primarily happening with contemporary pre-owned and also with older vintage watches that are not already collectible."

Spokespersons for Swatch and ​Rolex said they would not comment for this story. LVMH, Richemont, Patek Philippe and Audemars Piguet did not respond to requests for comment.

Gold prices surged to a record $5,600 an ounce in January as ​geopolitical concerns and trade worries pushed investors towards safe-haven precious metals. Gold now hovers around $4,200 per ounce, almost double its 2024 average.

The market price for used watches has not moved in the same way, however.

"I find it very sad, because obviously once something has been melted, it's gone forever," said Adrian Hailwood, a specialist in horological history.