India rushes critical infrastructure, medical support, and drinking water

India continues to expand its comprehensive support to Sri Lanka with critical infrastructure assistance, and safe drinking water initiatives, while continuing rescue and relief operations, reinforcing recovery and rebuilding the cyclone-affected areas under Operation Sagar Bandhu.

Since the launch of Operation Sagar Bandhu on 28 November, India has provided more than 58 tons of relief material including dry rations, tents, tarpaulins, hygiene kits, water purification kits and about 4.5 tonnes of medicines and surgical equipment. Another 50 tonnes of equipment including generators, inflatable rescue boats, Out Board Motors etc. have also been provided. Further, 130 tonnes of Baily Bridge units were airlifted to restore critical connectivity along with 31 engineers. Two columns of National Disaster Response Force comprising 80 experts and K9 units with specially trained dogs are working in Sri Lanka.

A fully fledged field hospital with 78 medical personnel was deployed, which is now providing life-saving care, in Mahiyanganaya near Kandy. Fully fledged medical centres have also been set up from the BHISHM Arogya Maitri cubes in the badly hit Ja-Ela region. INS Vikrant, INS Udaygiri and INS Sukanya, provided immediate rescue and relief assistance to Sri Lanka. Apart from the two Chetak helicopters deployed from INS Vikrant, two heavy lift, MI 17 helicopters of the Indian Air Force are actively involved in evacuations and airlifting relief material. Further, about 2500 stranded Indians were evacuated from Sri Lanka, including more than 400 on IAF aircrafts.

Indian Air Force (IAF) M17 helicopters continue rescue and relief operations yesterday (04) in flood-hit, inaccessible areas in central highlands of Sri Lanka. IAF helicopters airlifted 6.3 tonnes of relief material and evacuated 24 survivors to safe locations yesterday (04), including a pregnant woman.

Another C-17 Globemaster aircraft of IAF landed in Sri Lanka yesterday (04) carrying Bailey Bridge units along with a 25-member expert team, including engineers to help construct the bridge. These modular structures can be rapidly assembled, within hours to restore connectivity along vital road links of Sri Lanka. Indian field engineers who arrived on 03 December night with Bailey Bridge units are already working at the bridge sites damaged in the wake of Cyclone Ditwah to restore vital road connectivity, helping reopen access for communities in need.

In flood-hit Indivitiya, Ja-Ela, the Aarogya Maitri BHISHM Cube that arrived in Sri Lanka on 30 November on board IAF C-130J aircraft turned an open space into a fully functional medical centre — delivering diagnostics and treatment where services had collapsed. The medical units are self-sufficient without even needing external power supply to function. Over 300 patients received medical support for injuries, dehydration and urgent conditions.

As part of continuing recovery efforts, NDRF teams are supporting operations in Gampaha, addressing urgent drinking water needs through well cleaning and water purification activities, enabling affected families to regain access to safe drinking water and begin restoring normalcy.

In an online meeting held on 03 December, Bhaskar Katamneni, Secretary, Real Time Governance, Government of Andhra Pradesh, shared a digital disaster management toolkit comprising the Government of Andhra Pradesh’s best practices in disaster preparedness and response with Dr. Hans Wijayasuriya, Chief Advisor to the President on Digital Economy, and the GovTech team of Sri Lanka. The interaction marked an important step in strengthening institutional cooperation in digital governance and disaster resilience.

With relief teams, essential supplies, and critical infrastructure maintained in a state of readiness, India continues to provide swift and comprehensive support to Sri Lanka, ensuring that vulnerable communities are reached and essential services restored. Through Operation Sagar Bandhu, India stands as a reliable partner and friend across the sea, committed to helping Sri Lanka recover, reconnect communities, and rebuild resilience in the aftermath of Cyclone Ditwah.