Seychelles festive scene for Mirage

Music lovers are going to miss Mirage this festive season. In fact, they were not in town for the festive season last year, too. And the reason for their absence is because the folks at Seychelles crave for the music of Mirage and so they head for the Seychelles to do the needful.

The band is scheduled to leave for the Seychelles within the next few days and they will be featured at the Hilton Labriz Resort – the Lo Brizan pub/restaurant.

Mirage will be seen in action six nights a week, during the month of December, from 8.00 pm to 11.00 pm, with Christmas Eve, Christmas, and New Year’s Eve being extra special nights.

According to reports coming my way, Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve 2024 were celebrated with much gaiety at the Lo Brizan, with the 31st night celebrations going on till 2.30 am.

Mirage made the lead up to the dawning of 2025 extra special with a medley of songs that brought nostalgia to the crowd present and, after ‘Auld Lang Syne,’ it was music that had everyone gyrating on the dance floor.

This will be their fourth stint at the Lo Brizan pub/restaurant and the band has turned out to be quite popular with enthusiastic crowds turning up to see them in action.

French, German and Russian tourists, and locals, as well, patronise this outlet, and the group caters to these holidaymakers with a repertoire that is made up of songs that include Russian, French and German, and the language spoken in the Seychelles, Creole, with female vocalist Danu being quite adaptive, singing in all four languages.

Donald Pieris: Regarded as one ofSri Lanka’s most iconic vocalists

Local music lovers will get the opportunity of seeing their favourite band in action again, towards mid-January, after they complete their assignment in the Seychelles.

Back home, they will move into action at their usual venues, in Colombo: Gatz, at Cinnamon Life, and Mamas Beach, in Hikkaduwa.

However, there is talk that Mirage may have a few more foreign trips coming up in 2026.

Although the outfit did undergo a few lineup changes, with Donald Pieris at the helm, they are now oozing with professionalism where their music is concerned, their presentation … and their attire, as well.

Donald is not only a great drummer but also excels as a vocalist.

In fact, he is widely regarded as one of Sri Lanka’s most iconic vocalists, and, with Mirage, he has for company Sudham (bass/vocals), Gayan (lead guitar/vocals), Danu (female vocalist) and Toosha (keyboards).

The folly of imported ignorance: Why Sri Lanka must reject the foreign anti-vaccine delusion

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.