Global thought leaders to headline Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit 2025

A powerhouse roster of international and regional experts will headline the Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit 2025, setting the stage for a world-class dialogue on reform, resilience, and investment-led growth.

Organised by The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, the two-day summit will take place on 2 and 3 December at the Shangri-La Hotel, Colombo. Registrations close on 31 October, and participants are encouraged to secure their place early to engage with this exclusive gathering of policymakers, investors, and business leaders.

Leading the international line-up of Keynote Speakers across the Summit’s sessions, is EDOTCO Group, Malaysia, and Astro Holdings Chairman Kenneth Shen. With over three decades in investment, corporate finance, and capital markets, Shen brings a wealth of experience on regional capital flows and private sector transformation.

World Bank Country Manager for Sri Lanka Gevorg Sargsyan, brings over two decades of experience in infrastructure, energy, and climate finance. He has held senior roles across Europe, Central Asia, and East Asia, and served as the Global Lead for Clean Energy, contributing to policy development, financing strategies, and sustainable energy solutions.

Former Chief Economic Adviser to the Prime Minister of Greece Dr. Alex Patelis, offers comparative insights from Greece’s post-crisis recovery and reform journey. Having served as Global Head of FX & Debt Strategy and Managing Director of Global Research at Merrill Lynch, and Chief Economist at PSQR, he brings unmatched expertise in macroeconomic reform and financial strategy.

From the sustainability and logistics front, APM Terminals Global Head of Decarbonisation Tim Miltenburg, will spotlight the future of green logistics and sustainable trade. Leading APM’s ambitious mission to achieve net-zero emissions across all terminal sites by 2040, he heads the company’s Decarbonisation Centre of Excellence in The Hague.

Adding an investor’s perspective, AFC Asia Frontier Fund, Hong Kong, Co-Fund Manager Ruchir Desai brings deep market experience from across Asia’s frontier economies. His fund was recently recognised as the Best Emerging Market Equity Fund at the 2025 Asian Investor Asset Management Awards.

Intrepid Travel – Asia Managing Director Natalie Kidd, brings nearly 20 years of experience in building one of Asia’s largest responsible travel networks. Overseeing Intrepid’s operations across 28 offices, Kidd has also served on the Board of the Global Sustainable Tourism Council, contributing to the global sustainability conversation.

Centre for Social and Economic Progress Visiting Senior Fellow and former World Bank Economist Prof. Sanjay Kathuria who brings over 35 years of experience in development economics and policy research, will provide a South Asian perspective on trade, competitiveness, and integration.

IFC Regional Director for South Asia Imad N. Fakhoury, drives sustainable, private-sector-led growth in the region, focusing on financial inclusion, climate financing, and public-private partnerships. He previously served as Global Director of Infrastructure Finance, PPPs & Guarantees at the World Bank and held senior ministerial roles in Jordan, including Minister of Planning and International Cooperation.

Bringing a local investment focus, Board of Investment of Sri Lanka Chairman Arjuna Herath will outline the country’s renewed drive to attract sustainable, export-oriented investments aligned with Sri Lanka’s long-term development goals.

SLEIS 2025 is supported by: Platinum sponsors - Nestle, Standard Chartered Bank, Unilever, Silver Sponsor - VISA, Bronze sponsor - South Asia Gateway Terminals, Session sponsors – Colombo Stock Exchange and Sunshine Holdings, Television Partner - Dialog Television, Telecommunications Partner - Dialog, Hospitality Partner - Shangri-La Hotel, Colombo, Strategic Partners - Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Department of Commerce, Ministry of Trade, Commerce, Food Security and Co-operative Development, Board of Investment, Export Development Board, Sri Lanka Convention Bureau, Strategic Development Partner - Asian Development Bank, Knowledge Partner - World Bank, Logistics Partner - Hayleys Advantis, and Official Airline - SriLankan Airlines.