Will govt. reveal its plan for developing Ratmalana Airport?

In 1934 the State Council of Ceylon decided that an airport with easy access to Colombo was a necessity and declared that Ratmalana was the best site available. Accordingly, an air field was built and the first landing took place on 27 November 1935. This was Ceylon’s first designated Airfield. With the advent of WWII, the airport expanded and a runway was also built. The Royal Air Force (RAF) and the Fleet Air Arm used it.

To assist aircraft landing in bad weather and resulting bad visibility, a transmitter was built at Thalangama to generate a Radio Signal Beam directed along the extended centre line of the runway at Ratmalana. If the aircraft was tracking the correct path, the pilots would hear a continuous tone on their headsets.  However if they were left of the desired track, the pilots would hear a letter ‘A’ in Morse code (dit dah) or if right, a letter ‘N’ which was a (dah dit) in Morse code. The objective was to hear a continuous signal in the ears, which guided them towards Ratmalana. The descent to lower altitude was at the pilot’s discretion.

Wellington Airport, New Zealand, Control Tower, in a shopping Mall

As time went by, there was a low frequency, Non-Directional Radio Beacon (NDB) placed in the vicinity of the airport (Attidiya) and used with an Automatic Direction Finder (ADF) on board the aircraft. A needle over a compass dial pointed to Attidiya and gave directional guidance to international air traffic. Although it could accommodate an unlimited number of aircraft, when they needed it most, like during thunderstorm activity, there was static interference and the needles pointed towards the thunder storms instead of Attidiya. So, a Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Radio Range known as a ‘VOR’ for short was installed for more accuracy and free from interference.

Then in 1968, Ratmalana International Airport lost its ‘International’ status when the new Bandaranaike International Airport opened and all international operations moved to Katunayake. The equipment at the airport was allowed to deteriorate. The Radio Navigational letdown aids ran down. There was no proper Control Tower. Even the runway lights were not working and night flights had to depend on Kerosene Lamps. One redeeming grace, in the night, in those days, was that the Sapugaskanda Oil Refinery was in full production and the giant flare of the burning gasses was the guiding light to the Ratmalana Airport. The Pilots spotted the flare from far away and flew over the Refinery and then turned on the runway heading and could see the runway edge kerosene flares, flickering dimly in a dark patch that was the Ratmalana airport! The civil training aircraft of the Government Flying School of those days had neither radios nor any radio aids to navigation.

After 1977, the then UNP government created another problem for Ratmalana operations. The authorities decided to build a new Capital in Sri Jayewardenepura, Kotte and also move the New Parliament to that neck of the woods. Unfortunately, the Parliament was just 3.6 Nautical Miles from the end of the Ratmalana runway ‘as the crow flies’ and less than 1NM from the Thalangama Transmitters. In most countries overflying the Parliament is prohibited. Therefore, the Authorities blindly decreed the same in Sri Lanka. Thus, restricting the freedom of aircraft movements to the Ratmalana Runway and preventing safer, conventional landing approaches. It must be noted that Air Ceylon and other domestic flights were still using Ratmalana. Many professionals were quick to observe that it was akin to someone building a house near a railway line and then complaining that it was too noisy and requiring the railway to divert!

Everyone had learnt to live with the non-availability of precision Navigational aids at Ratmalana. Thalangama Transmitters lost its significance. The Urban Development Authority (UDA) eventually took vacant possession and the SL Army (Gemunu watch) established a camp there.  During December, with clear nights and cooler mornings, (Temperature inversions) combined with the North Easterly winds blowing smoke from the Sapugaskanda Refinery, the visibility on the final approach tends to get very bad at the Ratmalana airport. (See image 1)

In fact, on the morning of 14 December 2014, an SLAF Antonov AN 32, ferry flight from Katunayake, attempted to approach for landing at Ratmalana and crashed. This prompted the then Air Force Commander to write to the then Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) to re-install Navigational Facilities (See Letter below). Now over ten years have gone by and at last Airport and Aviation Sri Lanka (AASL) is slowly waking up to the fact that not only the seen but also the unseen facilities at Ratmalana should be brought up to standard in the name of air safety. Wide publicity is given to the fact that the Government’s intention is to make Ratmalana an International Business aircraft hub and regain its lost glory.

While this concept is being actively pursued by the Airport and Aviation Sri Lanka Ltd (AASL) and the Civil Aviation Authority Sri Lanka (CAASL), another security sensitive building has been erected in the vacant land at Thalangama, barely 1 NM from the Parliament and 4.4 NM from the runway end. That being the Akuregoda Military HeadQuarters. This has created an effective barrier for operation of legitimate air traffic. As a direct result more restrictions are bound to be imposed on inbound air traffic. Furthermore, it does seem like that there was no ‘master plan’ and the left hand didn’t know what the right hand was doing. (See image 3)

Air safety dictates that jet planes should have at least an 8 mile straight in (no turns) final approach. Now it is not possible to do that with the unplanned security sensitive buildings on the final approach to Ratmalana. Ideally, like in other countries, all parties, the Local Municipality Town Planner, the Civil Aviation Authority/ Airport and Aviation Ltd (CAASL/ AASL), and the Building developer, must make these long-term decisions. In Australia for instance the CAA’ Airports Authority has control of man-made obstacles for a radius of 25 miles. Unplanned buildings, called ‘man made relief’ as against ‘Geographic Relief’ (terrain) has spoiled the feasibility of the intended City Airport. Another case in point is the Kotelawala Defence University (K DU). Which is the tallest building in the vicinity of the airport that should never have been allowed to be built that high. This seems to be the malady this whole country is suffering from. The people in the know are afraid to speak up. Subsequently, no one is held accountable for these poor, uncoordinated decisions. The true professionals are not consulted. As a result, vision is ‘tunnelled’. The Sinhala saying Leda malath, bada suddai seems to be very appropriate. (Although the patient died, the bowels were clean!).

The Ratmalana Airport lacks a proper Control Tower with a 360 degree visibility of the area. A new Control Tower could be sited in the highest point in the vicinity. Perhaps at KDU to mitigate the hopeless situation. The Wellington, New Zealand Control Tower is on top of a Shopping Mall! (Seem image 4)

Wellington Airport, New Zealand, Control Tower, in a shopping Mall

It has also been discovered that the Sri Lanka Air Force Museum building interferes with the navigational and landing aids, radio transmissions at the Ratmalana Airport, if and when installed.

The Parliament has just approved 3 billion rupees for the development of the Ratmalana Airport. For what? Does the government have a plan? Can they reveal their intentions to the aviation professionals?

Are they willing to think out of the box to bring the airport up to scratch? Will it be a waste of time and money? Usually what happens in matters such as this is that they will spend money on structures that can be seen like Terminal Buildings and ignore all the unseen safety related improvements. The Aircraft Owners and Operators Association, Sri Lanka has provided the Minister and his team a ‘wish list’ of fifty improvements that can be done in Domestic Aviation. Perhaps this 3 billion Rupees could be used for implementing those suggestions.

RCyAF/ SLAF, Air Ceylon, Air Lanka, Singapore Airlines (SIA), SriLankan Airlines

Representative for ‘Aviation’ Oganisation of Professional Associations (OPA), Sri Lanka

‘Brothers in the forest’ – the fight to protect an isolated Amazon tribe

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.