‘Continuation of corruption-free policy, a must for greater German investments’

At present more than 300 German brands are available in Sri Lanka due to bilateral trade and investment and more investments could be attracted to this country, if the local bureaucracy acts faster, the “corruption-free policy, good governance continue and investments are properly protected, German ambassador to Sri Lanka, Dr. Felix Neumann said.

“This was the feedback I received from German companies operating in Sri Lanka and therefore German firms often compare Sri Lanka’s conditions with those of other countries in the region before committing to investments, Dr Neumann said while delivering remarks at the monthly ‘Ambassadors’ Roundtable Discussion’ organized by the Pathfinder Foundation. The event was held at the Colombo Club, Taj Samudra Hotel on Tuesday. It was presided over by Pathfinder Foundation Chairman Ambassador Bernard Gunathilake.

Ambassador Neumann said that ‘Stability and Global Order’ constitute a primary policy pillar for his government, emphasizing Germany’s commitment to safeguarding peace in Europe and beyond. “The second pillar, ‘Freedom: Upholding the Rule of Law and Human Rights’, is the foundation for lasting stability, he said. The ambassador emphasized that societies governed by the Rule of Law are inherently more stable and just than those led by power or force. Germany, he said, stands with those who rely on the Rule of Law.

The ambassador, highlighted that human rights, democracy and justice form the core of Germany’s foreign policy and international engagement.

He emphasized the importance of the Indian Ocean to global trade. “Sri Lanka’s strategic location and democratic stability contribute to peace and stability in the Indian Ocean region. Modern security extends beyond defence, encompassing energy, food and climate security, he said.

‘Security’, he identified as one of the three pillars of German foreign policy—alongside ‘wealth’ and ‘freedom’.

“Some German companies have to wait long to obtain licenses for production or to install plants here. German companies may look elsewhere if Sri Lanka’s approval processes are not made faster, the ambassador said.

Neumann added: “The Indian Ocean is a peaceful region. There is an existing principle of freedom of navigation throughout the Indian Ocean. Sri Lanka is not the biggest state in the region, but it is located at the very centre of the Indian Ocean, along some of the world’s most important international shipping routes.

“Thanks to nature, Sri Lanka has deep-sea harbours that are essential for these global trade lines. Therefore, Germany’s security is linked to the security of Sri Lanka. A stable, democratic Sri Lanka with the Rule of Law and a prosperous society contribute to stability at this key point in the Indian Ocean.

“I know there is a Sri Lankan policy position. It is fine. It is a friend to all and enemy to none. We have a country that has decided to be fair to everyone. That aligns with the international principle of freedom of navigation.”

Dr. Neumann further emphasized that Sri Lanka is among the few countries that enjoy a trade surplus with Germany.

“We export less to Sri Lanka than Sri Lanka exports to Germany. Germany is at the centre of Europe, and our wealth is largely based on access to the European market. Though Germany covers only one percent of the global surface, it represents the world’s third-largest economic power. For this, we need partners who engage with us in a common market. That is why I often say Germany is ‘Team Europe.’ Within the European Union, our goal is to keep the EU as open as possible to our partners,” he explained.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.