WIS Group’s Imperial Advisors expands conveyancing operation in Sri Lanka

WIS Group, a Sri Lankan company that provides financial solutions in the United Kingdom, has diversified its operations by expanding Imperial Advisors, its offshore conveyancing operation in Sri Lanka.

WIS Group was co-founded by Suneth Silva, Wijay Kanagasundaram, and Ifthikar Mohamed in 2009. It began as an Accountancy firm in the UK and has since expanded into a comprehensive financial services provider, including Mortgages, Insurance, and Wealth Management. Imperial Advisors, launched in June 2024, is the Group’s newest venture into the UK Legal and Conveyancing sector.

Imperial Advisors marked a highly successful launch and is now entering a phase of expansion. The firm is driving growth through the development of strategic, long-term partnerships with leading UK Mortgage Brokers and Lenders, strengthening its position as a trusted partner in the property services sector. To support its ambitious growth plans and ensure seamless delivery of its integrated service model, Imperial Advisors has commenced recruitment in Sri Lanka. With its unique approach that combines technology, expertise, and collaboration, Imperial Advisors is poised to enhance standards in the conveyancing industry while creating sustainable opportunities for growth both in the UK and internationally.

Sharing his thoughts, Suneth Silva, Co-Founder and Director of WIS Group of Companies stated, “We, at the WIS Group, are proud of the rapid success we have been able to achieve in a relatively short period of time. Central to this growth has been the establishment of strategically important partnerships which enhance the firm’s capabilities and reinforce our position as a trusted and forward-looking Conveyancing Partner. We also remain deeply committed to creating valuable and sustainable opportunities for professionals in Sri Lanka, ensuring that our expansion contributes meaningfully to local talent development while opening new pathways for their career advancement.”

CEAT Kelani attains ISO 14064-1:2018 certification for GHG emissions reporting

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.