Driver demerit points system pilot project to begin October 1

Colombo, Sep. 28 (Daily Mirror) - A pilot project for introducing a driver demerit points system for traffic offences will commence on October 1, 2026, as part of the Government's efforts to improve road safety and strengthen the country's public transport system.

The six-month pilot project, which will continue until March 2027, is being implemented under the National Transport Action Plan to give drivers time to understand and adapt to the new safety-oriented system.

The initiative was announced at a special media briefing held today (28) at the Ministry of Transport, Highways and Urban Development auditorium at Maganeguma Mahamedura, Koswatta, Battaramulla, under the patronage of Transport, Highways and Urban Development Minister Bimal Rathnayake.

The pilot project is being jointly implemented by the Sri Lanka Police, Ministry of Digital Economy, Department of Motor Traffic, LankaPay and GovTech, under the guidance of the Ministry of Transport, Highways and Urban Development.

Officials said all drivers operating on expressways and highways will be required to comply with the system during the six-month pilot period.

The demerit points system is expected to be permanently implemented from March 2027 following the completion of the pilot phase. It will cover 33 specified traffic offences.

Minister Bimal Rathnayake said the Government launched a sustainable programme to improve safety in the public transport sector in December 2024, stressing the need to address the more than 2,750 deaths caused by road accidents annually.

He said road accidents also cause significant damage to the country's economy and Gross Domestic Product (GDP), while resulting in a considerable loss of foreign exchange.

"A driving licence is not merely an asset or a right granted to a citizen, but also a responsibility," Rathnayake said.

He added that the six-month pilot project had been introduced with the objective of giving the public sufficient time to understand and adapt to the new system.

"The impact of this system will be felt only by those who drive in disregard of the law," he said.

The entire demerit points system will operate through digital infrastructure, with the Government aiming to implement it nationwide by March 2027.

Meanwhile, the Government has also streamlined the process of making online payments for traffic fines through Gov-Pay.

The online traffic fine payment system was initially launched as a pilot project in April 2025 on routes connecting Kurunegala and Anuradhapura. It was subsequently expanded islandwide in December 2025.

Drivers can now settle traffic fines online through Gov-Pay using participating banks, financial institutions and fintech applications.

Additional Secretary to the Ministry of Transport, Highways and Urban Development Avanthi Senarathna, Deputy Inspector General of Police (Traffic Division) W.P.J. Senadheera, Advisor to the Ministry of Digital Economy Affairs Sumudu Rathnayake and LankaPay CEO Channa de Silva were among those present at the briefing.