Hela Apparel files for winding up after exhausting restructuring options

Hela Apparel Holdings PLC yesterday disclosed its move to wind up the company through the courts after its Board concluded that the Group is unable to pay its debts due to mounting liabilities and continuing liquidity constraints. This is despite pursuing debt restructuring and strategic investment options to preserve the business.

In a disclosure to the Colombo Stock Exchange, the company said its Board, having reviewed the financial position of the company and its subsidiaries, including their realisable assets, liabilities, liquidity levels, indebtedness, operating performance, expected cash flows and creditor obligations, including inter-company guarantees given to creditors, concluded that Hela Apparel Holdings PLC and its subsidiaries, Hela Clothing (Private) Limited and Foundation Garments (Private) Limited, are not able to pay their debts and are therefore unable to continue their businesses.

Accordingly, the Board resolved on Aug. 4 to seek a court-supervised winding up of the company under the provisions of the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007. An application was filed before the Commercial High Court of the Western Province (Exercising Civil Jurisdiction) in Colombo on Aug. 5.

Hela Clothing (Private) Limited and Foundation Garments (Private) Limited have also filed applications before the same court on Aug. 5 to be wound up, following decisions by the respective boards of the two subsidiaries.

The Board said it wants to place on record that, as disclosed to the market from time to time, the directors had made due and continuing inquiry into the affairs of the company and the relevant Group entities, while regularly reviewing their financial and operational position. It said the directors had also sought professional and independent advice where appropriate and pursued, tested and reassessed all reasonably available restructuring and value-preservation alternatives, including debt restructurings and strategic investments.

The company said those efforts were undertaken with the objective of preserving value and mitigating losses to creditors, employees and other stakeholders.

It asserted the decision to seek winding up was taken only after all available alternatives had been exhausted, rejected, found incapable of timely implementation or were no longer considered commercially viable.