Sri Lanka AI Week 2026 Huawei continues to showcase practical AI applications

At Sri Lanka AI Week 2026, Huawei showcased 18 use cases spanning government, education, finance, industry, green energy and everyday life, demonstrating how artificial intelligence (AI) can be applied to real-world needs.

Huawei was the AI Technology Partner for the second consecutive year.

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya visited the Huawei exhibition together with the officials from the Education, Higher Education and Vocational Education Ministry, experiencing the Smart Classroom, AI in Education and MindGraph by Beijing Normal University demonstrations.

The Smart Classroom demonstration highlighted how connected technologies can bring teachers and students in different locations into a shared learning environment, while the AI in Education showcase demonstrated how AI can support teachers, enhance learning and enable more personalised education.

Dr. Amarasuriya praised the efforts of the Education, Higher Education and Vocational Education Ministry, Huawei and their partners to demonstrate practical applications of AI in education, noting the role of technology in supporting teachers, expanding learning opportunities and advancing a more inclusive, equitable and future-ready education system.

Later in the day, Digital Economy Deputy Minister Eng. Eranga Weeraratne, Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe, Digital Economy Ministry Secretary Waruna Sri Dhanapala and Chinese Ambassador Wei Huaxiang visited the Huawei exhibition and explored the AI Hands-On Classroom AI Empowering Industry, AI in Education and Smart Classroom demonstrations.

Weeraratne praised Huawei’s practical approach to showcasing AI applications, noting their relevance to Sri Lanka’s digital transformation across education, industry and skills development. The engagement also extended across the wider AI ecosystem, with industry professionals, technology partners, academics and other visitors engaging with the demonstrations and expressing appreciation for Huawei’s practical approach to applying AI across different areas of society and the economy.

Huawei Sri Lanka CEO Daniel Wu said that Huawei will continue bringing global experience, technology and ecosystem resources to Sri Lanka, while working side by side with the local partners to build local capabilities, develop local talent and create real value for the country.

“I believe that by working together, we can make AI not only more intelligent but also more local, more inclusive and more meaningful for everyone,” he said.