Arana Bhikkhu Giman Hala marks 10 years of service

Arana Bhikkhu Giman Hala, dedicated to facilitating Maha Sangha in-transit, celebrated 10 years of meritorious service yesterday (10).

The main purpose of this endeavour is to assist members of the Venerable Maha Sangha, especially from Theravada forest monasteries worldwide, in-transit in Colombo.

Situated in Battaramulla, within walking distance from the ‘Suhurupaya’ Office of the Immigration and Emigration Department, it facilitates foreign nationals in robes to work out their visa formalities.

There are over 200 foreigners from over 20 nationalities who have donned the robe of the Buddhist Clergy and meditated in the forests in Sri Lanka. They go on Pindapatha Charika or alms rounds in the mornings with their begging bowls and do not get involved in any financial transactions whatsoever, whether barter, monetary, or otherwise. Some of them sleep on the floor, not using any pillows.

Even when these members of the Venerable Maha Sangha occupy Arana Bhikkhu Giman Hala in-transit and on a temporary basis, they adhere to all the Vinaya rules or code of conduct relating to the Venerable Maha Sangha. They go on Pindapatha Charika in the vicinity and neighbours are thrilled to offer food. Transport is only by offerings from dayaka dayikas, either by their own vehicles or taxi services. If using public transport, they use ‘Bhikkhu Coupons’ offered to them by dayaka and dayikas. These are vouchers issued by the Sri Lanka Transport Board (SLTB) and Sri Lanka Railways (SLR), which could be exchanged for tickets in SLTB buses and SLR trains.

The motto of this establishment is “Let us strive to realise the three characteristics of life... ...By wise attention.”

These devotees launched a YouTube channel six years ago to facilitate interested parties to gain knowledge of the Dhamma by keeping in touch and Q&A with erudite and learned Venerable Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis worldwide. The motto of the channel is “Along the Noble Path – Dialogues with Kalyanamias.”

They were also instrumental in initiating the establishment of the very first Theravada Buddhist Bhikkhuni Meditation Centre in New Zealand with the advice, assistance, and concurrence with the first Kiwi Upasampada Bhikkhuni.

The next project envisaged is the building of two meditation zones in the Nilambe area, with minimum basic needs for living. The members of the Venerable Maha Sangha resident in these zones will be on Pindapatha Charika daily in the mornings for food. The zone has a naturally very-well ventilated room with water supply and toilet facilities. A meditation path with a meditation seat (Sakman Maluwa and Sakman Asanaya) is required, along with solar power to be used to light up the garden for security purposes.