World In Transition Viz-a-Viz Reshaping ME Landscape & Status Quo: What’s At Stake

While winds of peace have gathered momentum in the skies above the Middle East and West Asia; the threat of war has gradually subsided and receded – almost simultaneously. Following months-long military confrontations, amid intermittent showdowns and stalemates, the world is witnessing a turnaround, and signs of dawning peace in the ME, albeit slowly but surely, much to the joy and solace of all. The WA and Gulf region; hitherto remained a flashpoint/hotspot for over 3 months, and once on the brink of renewed escalation, is on the threshold of peace and stability at last. The optimism on the part of the world community, viz-a-viz prospects of ushering peace amidst a new world order in the making cannot be understated.

The US – Iran reached and signed a preliminary framework agreement to end hostilities on 14th June, inter-alia, aimed at,

1. Termination of hostilities: A 60-day ceasefire extension and immediate termination of military operations on all fronts.

2. Reopening trade routes: Reopening the Strait of Hormuz and lifting the U.S. naval blockade on Iranian ports.

3. Diplomatic talks: A 60-day window for intensive negotiations regarding Iran’s nuclear program and broader sanctions relief

Despite the agreement, there are thorny and major points of contention, including,

1. Israel’s position: Israel and Hezbollah have voiced caveats, with Iran insisting on Israel’s withdrawal of troops from Lebanon, which the U.S. and Israel haven’t accepted.

2. Skepticism: U.S. lawmakers are demanding details on the agreement, expressing doubts about its ability to dismantle Iran’s nuclear capabilities

Be that as it may, the peace agreement signed electronically on 14th June, indeed has given fresh impetus, renewed hope, and a new lease of life to all and sundry, within and beyond the ME and West Asia, which is home to dozens of US military bases. The humanity all throughout, including in the remotest places on the earth, is breathing a sigh of relief for what it means to them, and more so to those on the frontlines, be it in Iran Lebanon, Israel and countries in close proximity. The US-Iran peace agreement, and eventual military de-escalation and troop withdrawals on the cards, will surely bear the hallmarks of the first undeniable signs of dawning peace in the war-torn region of WA and the ME.

President Trump’s Twin Triumphs: US-Iran Deal and Trump’s 80th Birthday

Let’s have a closer look at the turning points in the hitherto prevailed US-Israel joint aggression against Iran, culminating in the peace deal struck on the 14th June 2026, which coincidentally fell on the 80th birthday of President Donald J. Trump, who in he-insight had the good fortune of celebrating twin triumphs, having achieved a diplomatic breakthrough with Iran. Announcing the US – Iran framework agreement, President Trump in a twitter message touted his achievement, calling it a historic feat viz-a-viz signing a complete agreement, reopening of the Strait of Hormuz, and an end to the U.S. blockade on the 14th, rekindling hopes of an end to decades-old US’s hostilities with Iran, amid durable peace, which he dubbed as a “win-win” situation. President Trump is expected to seek bipartisan consensus from the Congress for the peace agreement, which would enable him to garner approval of both the Congress and the Senate, and most importantly; the crucial support and blessings from the American public.

The high intensity war fought from February up-until early May, with intermittent bouts of attacks was not in the least interesting to people of Iran and elsewhere in the region. It’s a double whammy for the Iranian people to be caught-up between US/Israel military onslaught on the one hand, viz-a-viz widespread suppression of political dissent, severe economic inequality, and brutal enforcement by the state security forces of the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps on the other. A case in point is the brutal crackdown and suppression of the mass students’ uprisings and nation-wide anti-government protests in February 2026 resulting in the deaths of over 7000 people (documented), while it is believed that the real figure is alleged to be around 35,000 – 40,000 according to unconfirmed sources. Those who have witnessed and experienced first-hand, the absolute horror, unprecedented carnage, death and destruction caused to thousands of innocent people and loved ones, are simply heart-broken to say the least. What’s left at the end of the war is simply beyond one’s comprehension and imagination, besides a war-battered nation, alongside war-weary peoples and communities across swathes of landscape at the mercy of none, let alone the so-called war-mongers or liberators. Worst of all, those who bore the brunt of the firepower ought to continue the rest of their lives in a state of shock and destitution, not knowing what lies ahead, and what future holds for them and their families in the months and years to come. That’s the stark reality in the minds of thousands of war-victims, who inherited nothing but the raw, psychological scars of combat, haunting memories and a living nightmare. Needless to note, such victims of war ought to continue with traumatic life experiences in war-ravaged areas and villages, as history has proven time and again.

The landmark US – Iran deal, which garnered praise from European allies ahead of the G7 summit, is seen as a major morale booster for President Trump’s dwindling public image and approval rating, both home and abroad. President Trump’s announcement also coincided with “UFC Freedom 250”, an event at the White House, ahead of America’s 250 birthday celebrations on 04th July 2026. Iranian Foreign Minister Seyed Abbas Araghchi, confirmed striking a deal with the US, but stopped short of announcing further details. Meanwhile, Pakistani Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif, taking to twitter confirmed that a peace deal between the US and Iran has been reached, announcing the next steps towards signing the agreement in Geneva, Switzerland on 19th June, being the sole mediator, and go-between in the weeks and months since the war broke out in February. Pakistani Prime Minister, Shehbaz Sharif and Qatari Emir, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani deserve credit for their commitment, and statesmanship in brokering the peace agreement in good faith, viz-a-viz United States, and for making the deal a reality despite tensions and threats along the way.

The signing of the historic US – Iran framework agreement slated for 19th June 2026 in Geneva, Switzerland, will herald a new chapter in US – Iran relations. The United States severed formal diplomatic relations with Iran on April 7, 1980, following the Iranian takeover of the American Embassy in Tehran in 1979. Ever since, the two countries have maintained no official embassies or ambassadors, though they have recently begun re-engaging in limited, indirect diplomatic talks. The U.S. Embassy in Tehran has remained closed since 1980, and Iran has no embassy in Washington, D.C. either. In the absence of formal ties, Switzerland acts as the protecting power for U.S. interests in Iran, while the Embassy of Pakistan represents Iranian interests in the United States. Due to the lack of U.S. diplomatic presence, consular services for U.S. citizens in Iran are heavily restricted and facilitated through the Swiss Embassy’s Foreign Interests Section in Tehran.

Even before the actual signing of the US – Iran peace agreement due on the 19th in Geneva, Switzerland, the sense of euphoria and optimism among people across the world appear to be overwhelming, and dramatic. The announcement of a peace deal itself has sparked widespread jubilations and celebrations in the US, ME and Gulf countries. The people in the region have been yearning for peace from the inception of war, especially those who bore the brunt of hostilities and attacks against civilian infrastructure. It was a moment of joy and jubilation to all from the war-battered region. It is reported that the Iranian people in particular have been completely overwhelmed and overjoyed in hearing the breakthrough, whilst masses across the country have taken to streets in celebration of Iran’s resilience, defiance and triumphalism against its perceived adversaries. The feelings and sentiments among the Iranian public have risen to all time high in the hope of ushering lasting peace and stability after decades of hostility, instability and coercion albeit a renewed thaw with Gulf nations. The people who endured sufferings and trauma on the frontlines of the war would be the most-relieved and the happiest, given their plight over years of tensions and fear-psychosis in complete isolation, with no signs of peace dawning.

In the wake of signing US – Iran deal electronically on 14th, financial markets and world economies across the globe have reacted enthusiastically amidst all shares indexes and share markets showings massive gains and upwards swings including the Wall Street share indexes such as S&P, Dow Jones Industrial Average and NASDAQ Composite showing remarkable capital gains; marked by market stabilization and positive sentiments. The US crude oil prices including Brent, WTI hovered around $75 to $t77 per barrel, falling to their lowest levels since early March. The price drop is largely driven by prospects of the US-Iran interim deal which saw economic rebound and reopening shipping routes in the Strait of Hormuz, and surge in oil exports. As the media plays it out, US – Iran deal underscores its vitality and significance for the countries near and far in terms of stabilizing markets and status quo across the world, with renewed hopes and optimism reverberating across continents, with the prospects of dawning of a new world order for the whole of humanity and countries across the world. It is learnt that Iran has already started exporting oil through Straits of Hormuz, with renewed assurances and security guarantees to Gulf countries for navigation of cargo vessels and oil tankers boosting oil revenues, trade and exports in the region. The energy and oil sectors too have reported surges in production and manufacturing outputs, while companies and industries based in the Gulf region have increased their capacities and sales in so far as to catering to demands and orders already held up for months, for want of clearance of cargo vessels and ships for navigation through Straits of Hormuz which remained closed for months.

Whilst nitty-gritties of the US-Iran peace agreement are shrouded in mystery, and yet on the cards, it appears that the peace deal, by and large is far-reaching, viz-a-viz to the full extent of striking an open and verifiable framework taking Iran – US relations to a new height. Among other things, the agreement, inter-alia, entails the prospects of initiating trade and investment deals, and other initiatives encompassing a gamut of spheres and interests. Iran also is to benefit from the EU agreeing to lift its embargo on goods and services, with potential trade and investments deals to be explored. Meanwhile, Iran will be allowed to proceed with its oil and other commodity exports under fair trade, and within the WTO framework. The Straits of Hormuz once again remain open for cargo vessels transporting oil and other commercial cargo alike. Meanwhile Iran is supposed to guarantee peace and security of all Gulf nations under the agreement. As part of the deal, Iran’s frozen assets in billions of dollars are slated to be released, while the US embargo on Iranian assets are expected to be lifted upon Iran guaranteeing its centrifuging of uranium is only for peaceful purposes, while the fate of enriched uranium stockpiles are yet to be decided.

It’s Time for Peace Building: World Reacts with Euphoria and Optimism

This is not a time for media hype, nor should there be undue declaration of triumphalism over war victims, especially on the eve of formalizing and signing the peace agreement. After all, humanity has endured unimaginable suffering for far too long. Peace loving Americans in millions throughout the country have embraced Bhante Pannakara’s message of peace and spirituality during the 2300-mile:110-day Walk for Peace led by him and group of monks from the Buddhist Monastery in Fort-worth, Texas in October 2025, and culminating in Washington DC. on 12th February 2026. They deserve sincere appreciation for promoting peace, non-violence and loving kindness captivating millions of Americans. The US – Iran peace deal also had the blessings of a congregation of Buddhist Monks convened at the White House recently where they invoked blessings on President Trump and the people of America on the occasion of Vesak Celebrations in May 2026.

The war on Iran has impacted almost every nation on earth, stemming from its negative consequences on spiraling cost of fuel, food and cost of living, rising inflation, market volatility, strain on exports & imports, livelihood and well-being of millions of people across the globe. Let’s pray and hope that there never will be yet another escalation of sorts akin to the status-quo in WA and the Gulf region. By all counts, the war on Iran reached a stalemate with neither side appearing to have won or lost, at the least. Given that the United States and Iran are closer than ever to signing a historic peace agreement in Geneva Switzerland on the 19th June, let all parties to the conflict, both within and without, breathe a sigh of relief. The US-Iran agreement essentially provides a beacon of hope, and reasons to be optimistic. It’s time to chart a new course, building upon peace, mutual trust and understanding with consensus with all. Simply put, it sounds as if a new world order is in the making, for the sake of a secure, peaceful and stable world for all, in the name of humanity and kindness.

( “Mankind must put an end to war before war puts an end to mankind” – US President John F. Kennedy )

*The writer is a retired Ambassador and Foreign Ministry Spokesman. He can be reached at schandrad@hotmail.com

(Whither UN, Multilateralism, Diplomacy: Why Do They Matter More Than Ever)