My friendship with Wijetunga used as a bridge for Gamini D to return to UNP

At this stage President Wijetunga re-established his friendship with me. Though welcomed by the media and Colombo society he was getting increasingly isolated in the UNP of which he had now become leader by happenstance. Sirisena Cooray had fallen out with him as Wijetunga did not want to portray himself as a stooge of former President Premadasa. The latter had been contemptuous of him after achieving his objective of using him to dislodge Gamini and Lalith. The new Presidents chief confidant at this stage was Tilak Marapone, a kinsman who had been the Attorney General. He also had several businessmen friends like Susil Moonesinghe, “Yasoda” Kasturiaratchi and Earl Gunasekera.

Wijetunga and I met at several functions in Kandy and he invited me to visit him in President’s House. The main link between us however was the gang of officials in Wijetunga’s personal staff who had consistently been with him since I was his Secretary in the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting under the JRJ administration. These Kandy boys were comfortable with me and would constantly advice their boss to get me back and make use of my services. The President was a lonely man who looked forward to leaving Colombo every Friday with his staff to spend the weekend with his wife and only child – a daughter whom he loved very much. He fretted that she was not getting married though advancing in years. The Kandy based staff occupied the President’s House in Kandy and Wijetunga would meet all and sundry there.

A queue of supplicants wended their way through Kandy city and Wijetunga would meet them all and try to accommodate their requests. He wanted to appoint me as the Chairman of Lake House, which at that time was one of the most prestigious positions in the country. I discussed the President’s offer with Gamini and we agreed that I should be the bridge between the President and him. Since his early attempts to befriend Wijetunga had been rebuffed Gamini was desperate to make contact with him and hasten his return to the UNP. This was a scenario which caused much concern to Ranil and his clique of loyalists who wanted to keep Gamini out at any cost. They kept on badmouthing him to Wijetunga who, at that stage, was beginning to change his position particularly because the Parliamentary and Presidential elections were now in the horizon. He was undecided as to whether he should chance a Presidential electoral contest or go for a Parliamentary election.

I resigned from the Central Provincial Council and took over the position of Chairman of Lake House. The incumbent Chairman a lawyer named Rodrigo, was asked to go at short notice because he was a Premadasa loyalist who was now aligned with Sirisena Cooray and not particularly friendly towards Wijetunga. Cooray was constantly highlighting his loyalty to the deceased President and distancing himself from his successor who in a bold move removed him from the powerful post of General Secretary of the UNP. This sent shockwaves through the party but the general public applauded Cooray’s replacement by Dr. Wijesekera -highly regarded professional and son of a Peradeniya University Professor. The general public and the media welcomed our appointments as an indication of the new President’s open mindedness.

Though I had spent a lifetime in the field of media and information heading Lake House was a new experience for me. At that time it was a highly prestigious and powerful position. I was fortunate in that I had many personal friends among local journalists. Even icons like Tarzie Vittachi, Reggie Siriwardene, Denzil Peiris and Mervyn de Silva were my friends. So were Esmond Wickremasinghe and Ranjit Wijewardene. Among those then in Lake House, Manik de Silva-the editor of Daily News-was my close friend. The other editors too were known to me especially BHS Jayawardene, GS Perera-the editor of Dinamina and Tilakaratne Kuruwita Bandara who was the editor of Silumina. So it was an easy transition for me and I was heartened when the whole staff of the institution gathered at the entrance to the building to welcome me – probably a unique gesture in an institution then still working to strict “D.R. Wijewardena rules”. Today unfortunately, under high government control, Lake House has lost its lustre.

I was keen to make changes at Lake House with the concurrence of a very cooperative Board which included Edward Gunawardene who had retired after a distinguished career in the Police service. The General Manager was Amaradasa, the son of my old friend K. G. Amaradasa, who had been the administrative secretary of the State Literary Bureau in the sixties. It so happened that I was able to commission the giant Rotary press which had been ordered by my predecessor. This enabled our newspapers to be printed closer to distribution deadlines so that we could carry up to date news thereby beating our rivals in that department.

We could also undertake bigger print orders for our popular newspapers thereby releasing our other machines for printing of smaller specialist papers which had been started willy nilly to satisfy various interests and journalists. Many of them were a drain on the company’s income. As a conciliatory gesture I decided to invite the previous owners of Lake House to attend the inaugural ceremony. Ranjit Wijewardene graciously accepted the invitation while his other partners demurred partly because, as they told me later, they could not bear to come back to the premises which were forcibly acquired by Mrs. B on the instigation of the leftists in her Government. President Wijetunga visited Lake House for the opening.

I also had a hand in starting the “Sunday Observer Review of Books” which was designed to assist local writers. To start off I began a review of James Manor’s biography of Bandaranaike entitled the “Expedient Utopian”. My review was published in two consecutive installments. But before I could publish the third installment I got an unexpected telephone call from JR Jayewardene. He wanted me to drop in at “Braemar” for a chat. In my article I had used information available in a book by Micheal Roberts on the Ceylon National Congress.

In those papers there was a reference to Sir John Kotelawala calling the young JRJ a “beachcomber”. At that time there was no love lost between the two since JRJ had brought a resolution to the CNC in which its members were precluded from obtaining membership in another political party. This was aimed primarily at Bandaranaike whose Sinhala Maha Sabha included many leaders of the CNC like Kotelawela. This resolution was opposed by DS Senanayake as well who did not want juniors like JRJ and Dudley to rock the boat while delicate negotiations were going on for Dominion status.

When I called over that afternoon JRJ was in a generous mood. He took me out to the garden facing his sitting room and ordered brandy. While sipping brandy he reminisced about the CNC of which he had been a secretary after Bandaranaike. He said that Kotelawala was hostile to him at that stage and would call him names in his inimitable style. There had been hostility between the Kotelawalas and Jayewardenes of the earlier generation. Sir John’s father and JRJs uncle had married two sisters from the progeny of Mudaliyar Attygalle of Madapatha who was reputed to be one of the richest men in the country. A third sister was married to FR Senanayake. Attygalle’s son who was to inherit the fortune was shot dead by a hired gunman.

John Kotelawala Snr was accused of planning this murder and was found guilty by the Supreme Court, He was sentenced to death. Kotelawala committed suicide in prison. Brother-in-law Jayewardene was despised by the Kotelawalas as he had helped the prosecution to convict their kinsman. That was now all water under the bridge and JRJ did not want those Kotelawala epithets to be resurrected and brought to the notice of a new generation.

I told him that I had no intention of embarrassing him. He talked to me about his retirement and that he was unhappy that all his legatees had been killed. In his usual style he accompanied me to the door and I left marveling at the old man’s stamina and his concern to correct the record about his family for posterity. It was a bravura performance and it has long remained ingrained in my memory. A general election was declared not long after and I could not complete my review of James Manor’s book.

Another noteworthy event in my short stay as Chairman is still referred to as “Amunugama Buriyani”. I received a complaint from the minor staff that the quality of meals in the Lake House canteen had deteriorated. The Chairman’s meals during the time of DR Wijewardena were the stuff of legend. A sick man in his later years, the Chairman’s food had been sent “hot hot” from home by car. His orderlies had arranged it meticulously in a special dining room next to his office. That dining room had been used by all his successors for fine dining and a short siesta afterwards because they spent a lot of time in the premises supervising newspapers which came out both in the morning and evening. The proprietors of Lake House were well known to dedicate much of their time and effort to bring out a set of classy publications.

Needless to say after nationalization the dedication of the state appointed Chairmen were not of the same standard. Nevertheless the mystique about the Chairman’s dining room remained. Since many nationalized ventures “marched on the stomach” of their overpaid workers special attention was paid to canteens and lunch packets which contributed to the ever growing “perks” of the “hoi polloi”. On receiving complaints about this apparently highly sensitive issue by the minor staff of Lake House, I decided to change the class bound “tiffin culture” of the institution.

Taking drastic action based on my experience of canteen procedures in University halls of residence and Kachcheries, I decided to have my lunch in the Lake House canteen.

The workers were overjoyed and the food contractor had to reluctantly improve his menu. The company directors and senior journalists joined me at lunch. I then suggested that the menu should include a “buriyani” to be served as lunch every Friday. This was done much to the satisfaction of the staff and constant requests for higher payments by the food contractor. I was told that this change was continued after my departure and cynical newspapermen of Lake House dubbed it the “Amunugama buriyani”.

By this time Gamini had decided to rejoin the UNP. But Wijetunga was torn between the wishes of many of his friends who wanted Gamini back and the leaders of the official party machine, particularly Ranil, Choksy and Cooray who wanted to keep him out. But the numbers supporting Gamini were increasing including those in his personal staff whom Ranil kept at a distance. I was meeting the President almost on a daily basis and was able to recommend that he should bring Gamini back to the UNP fold. One evening he told me to bring Gamini to President’s House. But after Gamini got ready together with some DUNF leaders to make the trip, Wijetunga abruptly cancelled his offer and I had the unenviable chore of returning to his house to announce the bad news.

Obviously the President was being pressurized at a very high level. On the following day he changed his mind again and we had a grand event under the patronage of Wijetunga as leader of the UNP. These events were well described by Lasantha Wickrematunge in his political column in the Sunday Times of 30th January 1994, parts of which are reproduced below.

“As was reported in this column last week with Sarath Amunugama, a relative and former Permanent Secretary to Mr. Wijetunga appointed by Mr. Dissanayake to be the negotiating representative for the DUNF, the President on Tuesday January 18th called in UNP General Secretary and Housing Minister Sirisena Cooray to do the honours for the UNP.

The appointment of Dr. Amunugama to negotiate for the DUNF was made by Mr. Dissanayake with the concurrence of the President to ensure the smooth passage of the process underway as he was also ‘very friendly; with the UNP top trio of Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe and Minister Cooray and K. N. Choksy. At the same time Dr. Amunugama also had a rapport with Mr. Cooray having worked closely with him during his days as Mayor when the former was Secretary in charge of Tourism, Information and Broadcasting.

“Dr. Amunugama is also a close buddy of WD Ailapperuma long time Secretary to Mr. Cooray’s Ministry having read sociology at the university together. Thus it was thought Dr. Amunugama would be the ideal negotiator to get the process underway. Eventually on a Presidential directive Dr. Amunugama and Mr. Cooray decided to meet at the Housing Ministry on January 20 to work out the modalities. In fixing the time for the meeting Mr. Cooray was to tell Dr. Amunugama “Don’t worry if I get a bit late, your friend Ailapperuma will be there.”

At the time Dr. Amunugama walked into the Housing Ministry meeting Mr. Cooray was already there with Minister Choksy. The meeting began with the dispelling of any hostility to the re-entry of Mr. Dissanayake with Mr. Cooray going to the extent of saying that though various journals had sought to give the impression the PM, Mr. Choksy and he were against the move there was no truth to it.

“With that out of the way the trio sat down and worked out the modalities namely for the DUNF Provincial Minsters and Chief Minister to hold on to their seats with the help of the UNP. Thereafter the trio also discussed the need for a statement to be issued by Mr. Dissanayake at the point of entry and the outlines of the statement. With the meeting having ended on that cordial note the stage was set for implementation on Sunday January 23.

“In the meantime on January 22 Saturday Mr. Dissanayake and Dr. Amunugama worked out the draft statement on the basis that reconciliation must be the golden thread that runs through the whole of it. Having done that a copy was sent to Mr. Choksy who also agreed with the contents. The only change was the inclusion of the name Ranil Wickremesinghe after the word Prime Minister which had not been typed in on the draft statement.

“It was in this backdrop that developments on January 23 were to take place. By this time all indications were Mr. Dissanayake would rejoin the UNP on Sunday night prior to which a formal round of talks were scheduled among President Wijetunga, Minister Choksy and Dr. Amunugama. It was at this meeting that certain snags surfaced which threatened the successful conclusion of the talks.

“At the time Dr. Amunugama walked into President’s House at seven pm Mr. Wijetunga was alone having returned from Kandy hours earlier. Soon after Mr. Choksy walked in, the discussion got under way. The question was posed whether it would not be better if the whole process was put off for two to three weeks until the “legal process” by which DUNF members, particularly the Provincial Councilors, could join the UNP was sorted out. While President Wijetunga was contemplating the implications of this suggestion, Dr. Amunugama reacted quickly to ensure the there was no further delay, possibly feeling there could be many a slip between the cup and the lip.

“Accordingly Dr. Amungama said the whole country was expecting the development to take place this week and any delay would only provide ammunition to those waiting to pick holes in the ongoing process. He went on to say that in view of the legal poser Mr. Dissanayake could as DUNF leader join the UNP as a symbolic act and also resign from the Central Provincial Council. That he said in the eyes of the public will be a symbolic merger between the UNP and DUNF and the others would remain outside until the legal problems were sorted out. The President readily agreed to this formula with Minister Choksy too concurring.

“With that problem out of the way, there was another legal poser, that being the position of a person rejoining the party after being sacked. However President Wijetunga was to point out at this stage, he had the authority of the working committee to negotiate with Mr. Dissanayake and arrive at a decision in the best interests of the party and even if further approval was needed it will be a mere formality. On that note the meeting ended. The time now was after 9.00 pm and it was considered too late to go through with the formal ceremony and Mr. Wijetunga inquired from Dr. Amunugama whether it would be alright to do it the following day.

“Thereafter Dr. Amunugama telephoned Mr. Dissanayakes residence where all the DUNF leaders were gathered and inquired whether Monday will be suitable. Mr. Dissanayake for reasons personal preferred Wednesday morning and on this being conveyed to the President he agreed. On that note the meeting ended and Mr Choksy and Dr. Amungama departed. Mr. Choksy later briefed top UNPers of the state of play and Dr Amunugama did likewise having driven to Mr. Dissanayakes residence.

“At the ministerial meeting on Wednesday, President Wijetunga informed the ministers of the ceremony later that morning and obtained unanimous approval for his actions. Soon after the cabinet meeting the President left for his official residence where Mr. Dissanayake and party were expected at 10.15am. Speaker MH Mohamed too called on the President minutes before that and spoke to the leader and went out all smiles. Thereafter Mr. Dissanayake was invited in by the President and the formalities attended to.

“The question of referring the application to the working committee also was overlooked with the President personally handing over the membership card to Mr. Dissanayake thereby enrolling him as a member once again. That done the other members left while the President, Mr. Choksy, Mr. Dissanayake and Dr. Amunugama continued their political dialogue discussing future strategies.”

All these changes were not to Ranil’s liking. In many ways Gamini’s style was the exact opposite of Ranil’s who knew that party opinion would swing to Gamini who was a charismatic leader. As mentioned above his camp first raised technical objections based on the fact that Gamini had been expelled from the party [by Premadasa] and the process of rejoining for those expelled was a long drawn out one. Wijetunga simply ignored this provision and handed over a membership card at our meeting. Ranil then wanted a letter from Gamini expressing his loyalty to the PM. The expectation perhaps was that this demand would be arrogantly rejected by Gamini. But we advised him “to stoop to conquer” and I drafted a reply that could take us out of that well laid trap.

It must be stated that Cooray at this stage welcomed the advent of Gamini which debilitated the anti-Gamini forces and we were able to integrate the majority of DUNF supporters with the UNP under the now benign Wijetunga. The Ranil camp never forgave Cooray for not sabotaging Gamini’s attempt to rejoin the UNP. We then faced the challenge of getting Gamini into Parliament. Every attempt was made by the anti-Gamini forces to ensure that there was no vacancy created by the resignation of a sitting national list member.

At first these national list members were unwilling to resign for love or money. On one occasion Gamini and I spent time in a car in the early hours of the morning to intercept an MP who was not returning his calls even though she entered Parliament as a Gamini loyalist. She was returning home in the early hours of the morning after meeting her boy friend and was not amused to see the two of us at her gate.

After a long and anxious period of bargaining a minority MP was induced to vacate his seat and Wijetunga promptly appointed Gamini to fill that vacancy and added him to his Cabinet as Minister in charge of Mahaweli development.

Memoirs of one of Epstein’s victims, Virginia Giuffre, titled Nobody’s Girl, released posthumously

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.