PE veteran Nissanka Weerasekera joins Lanka Ventures, LVL Energy Fund Boards

Lanka Ventures PLC and LVL Energy Fund PLC have appointed Private Equity veteran Nissanka Weerasekera to their Boards as an Independent Non-Executive Director.

Weerasekera served as the Regional Managing Partner for Central and South Asia of Aureos Capital, a leading international Private Equity (PE) fund manager focusing on small and mid-cap enterprises in emerging markets worldwide from 2003 until the acquisition of Aureos Capital by the Abraaj Group in 2012.

He also functioned as the Group Operations Director of Aureos Capital while serving on the Board of Directors of the parent company of Aureos in the United Kingdom. After the acquisition of Aureos, he served as the Managing Director for Sri Lanka and Bangladesh of the Abraaj Group until his retirement in 2017.

Weerasekera started his PE career in the mid-1990s as the CEO of the pioneer Sri Lankan Venture Capital (VC) firm PVIC and subsequently as the Managing Director of Nextventures, a VC firm spun-off from PVIC.

He has served as the Nominee Director of numerous investee companies of the aforementioned PE and VC firms including among others, MillenniumIT, Interblocks, ConceptNursery, TextCentric, e-Channelling, Richlife Dairies, Dutch Lanka Trailers, Asiri Central Hospital, and Apollo Hospital Dhaka.

In addition, he has served as an Independent Non-Executive Director of several public listed companies in Sri Lanka including among others, Dipped Products PLC, John Keells Hotels PLC, Sunshine Holdings PLC and Watawala Plantations PLC.

He currently serves as an Independent Non-Executive Director of ACL Cables PLC and TAL Lanka Hotels PLC. He is also a Director of The Children’s Heart Project of Sri Lanka. He is a past-President of the Venture Capital Association of Sri Lanka, a past-Editor of the Sri Lanka Association of Economists and a past-Trustee of the National Trust of Sri Lanka.

He is a Fellow Member of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (FCMA), has an MA in economics from the University of Colombo and a BSc (Hons) in physics from the University of Peradeniya.