When the law waltzes with power

A woman has been arrested and remanded for driving dangerously and obstructing the police in Gampaha. She is alleged to have falsely claimed to be a Senior DIG’s sister. The matter is now before the Gampaha Magistrate’s Court, and therefore it is best left to the learned judge.

False personation or claiming fictitious links to those in authority, and name-dropping are typical ruses traffic law violators often use to evade legal action. There are also situations where influential persons intervene on behalf of the transgressors, making the ordinary traffic police personnel hesitant to carry out their duties.

The high-octane performance of the police in Gampaha on Friday, when they pursued and arrested the aforesaid woman, was remarkable and praiseworthy. But it is sadly absent when the police happen to deal with the members of the ruling party. One may recall that in September, a group of JVP cadres led by some government MPs stormed an office of the Frontline Socialist Party (FSP) in full view of the police. The FSP members were thrown out, and the police sided with the attackers, who claimed that they had won a court case against the FSP and had a copy of the judgement. The police went so far as to provide protection to the disputed office afterwards.

Thankfully, a few days later, the Gampaha Additional Magistrate directed the Yakkala Police to evict all those who were forcibly occupying the FSP office and keep the premises under police custody until the Gampaha District Court delivered a ruling on the ownership of the place. Thus, it became obvious that the JVP activists had told the police a blatant lie and caused an affront to the dignity of the judiciary. But the police did not take any action against those who had misled them. The JVP cadres’ false claim at issue, in our book, is far more serious than pretending to be a sibling of an SDIG.

The Opposition has alleged, in Parliament, that former SDIG Ravi Seneviratne, who is the current Secretary to the Ministry of Public Security, abused his authority to have two serious charges against him including drunk driving dropped regarding a road accident, over which he was arrested and remanded in 2023. One is reminded of the despicable manner in which the Rajapaksa government opened an escape route for Mervyn Silva, charged with cheque fraud, a criminal offence. That serious charge was dropped and Silva walked free!

The Opposition has also accused the police of having refrained from arresting a deputy minister and another NPP MP facing a fraud charge although they swiftly arrest the political opponents of the government for lesser offences. As we pointed out in a previous editorial comment, those who expected the 2024 regime change to bring about a radical break from the rotten political culture that flourished under previous governments must be disappointed and disillusioned.

On 01 May 2025, scores of JVP supporters on their way to the NPP’s International Labour Day rally at Galle Face broke journey, with their buses unlawfully parked on the Southern Expressway. They leisurely had lunch and strolled along the expressway. The police looked the other way. They would have arrested the culprits and hauled them up before courts in double-quick time if the latter had not been government supporters.

The NPP’s rule began with a false claim. In 2024, the then Speaker of Parliament Asoka Ranwala claimed to have obtained a doctorate from a Japanese university. The government insisted that his claim was true, but when pressure mounted on it to furnish proof of his educational qualifications, it threw him under the bus. A fish is said to rot from the head down.

Is it that Sri Lanka is assuming the characteristics of Orwell’s Animal Farm, and under the incumbent dispensation, which claims to have restored the rule of law, all citizens are equal but the ruling party politicians and their associates are ‘more equal than’ others?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.