How the world changed after the Iran War

A deal to end the war on Iran has been negotiated and there is speculation whether the ceasefire would hold. The fact that Trump was looking for an off-ramp to end the war was obvious and, therefore, there is hope that he may not want to resume hostilities, though Netanyahu may want to undermine the peace process. According to leading intellectuals, like Prof. Jeffrey Sachs, Prof. John Mearsheimer and others, the war on Iran was a stupid unnecessary act of illegal aggression, instigated by Israel, with considerable political, strategic, hegemonic and prestige loss to the US. It was not just the futility of war that the world saw, but that the supremacy of the US that Trump wanted to impose on the world with his “Make America Great Again” project, has been proved to be a fallacy.

The US had not learnt the lesson that it had failed to achieve its objectives in every war that it had fought after the Second World War, in Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, Syria, etc. For instance, the Syrian government wants Russia to have bases in Syria, Iraq asked the US to withdraw its military from its land during the Iran war.

Trump was encouraged by the apparent success he had in Venezuela and was easily persuaded by Netanyahu to join in the war on Iran. They meant it to be a quick job, just like in Venezuela, decapitate the leadership and install a puppet regime. That didn’t happen. The murdered Ayatollah’s son took over and the people seem to have rallied round their rulers.

During the three-month-long war Iran managed not only to survive but also to inflict as much damage as it suffered, on Israel and US military assets in the region. Seventeen US bases in the UAE, Bahrain, Qatar, Kuwait, Iraq, etc.. were made uninhabitable. Forty two US aircraft were damaged or destroyed. There were attacks on civilian infrastructure, such as energy plants, desalination units, oil and gas fields, and airports, threatening that there would be more on a wider scale if Iranian infra-structure was attacked, which Trump had threatened to do. If this had happened countries like Qatar and Bahrain which depend 100% on desalination for their water requirements would have been made unliveable. These countries asked Trump to stop the war. One may ask whether it’s legal to attack countries not directly involved in the war. The UN charter on war regulations allow such attacks if the land of those countries are used by the aggressor to launch the war.

Most significant revelation of all these attacks by Iran was the fact that the US was not able to protect its allies in the Gulf nor its assets and the presence of US bases became a vulnerability and a danger to the host countries rather than  a security guarantee. The experts say that the US may never be able to rebuild these bases and return to them. Gulf countries may want to reconsider this matter. As Henry Kissinger famously said “to be America’s enemy is dangerous but to be its friend is fatal”.

Iran had the ingenuity and the capability to use the Strait of Hormuz as a weapon of immense power. By closing it, Iran could exert considerable pressure on Trump, domestically as well as globally, as fuel prices shot up, affecting the economy of most countries. All attempts to force Iran to open the Hormuz failed and finally it proved to be a decisive factor. And Hormuz has been proved to be a very strong weapon in Iran’s hands.

After finalising the deal, both countries claimed victory. The US says it has managed to get the Hormuz opened, but it was open before the war! The US claimed Iran will never be able to acquire nuclear weapon capability, but Iran has always maintained that it needs no nuclear weapons and it has entered into a non-nuclear agreement in 2015 with provision for IEA  monitoring. Iran, moreover, has emerged as a powerful, influential nation possessing considerable military capability. It has demonstrated its prowess in missile technology, unveiling several types of missiles. Though the US claimed that their strikes had decimated Iran’s missile capability, experts say 75% of it remains. Though Israel demanded that any agreement with Iran must guarantee restrictions on its missile manufacturing capacity no such conditions have been included in the MoU.

If one were to look carefully at the individual clauses of the MoU, one could see that Iran has won most of its demands, such as lifting of sanctions, but what it gives back in return are what already existed before the war, such as open Hormuz, no-nuclear weapons agreement. Thus the US has not won any of its goals in this war except inflict heavy economic damage on Iran, which the latter could cope with, as it has shown throughout history.

Another matter of significance is the change in the geopolitical configuration in the Middle East. The apparent invincibility of Israel has been considerably damaged. Both Iran and Hezbollah have been able to penetrate its much vaunted air defence system, the Iron Dome. Iran came close to striking Israel’s nuclear site. Israeli casualty figures are higher than in previous wars in southern Lebanon. Hezbollah had been written off after the last invasion by Israel but seems to have risen out of ashes.

The Arab countries, which have established links with Israel, may be reconsidering their strategy, and the Abraham Accord, involving Israel, the UAE and Bahrain, may be in danger of being revoked. The UAE, which is the most anti-Iran state in the Gulf, has engaged in high-level face-to-face talks with Iran to de-escalate regional tensions. Saudi Arabia, wary of US incapacity to manage its many interests, has turned towards China, Pakistan and Turkey. This is just the beginning, more similar changes could be expected in Iraq, Syria, Egypt, Lebanon and others. Arab solidarity may gain in strength.

This new geopolitical situation would facilitate the development plans that China with its Belt and Road Initiative was trying to implement in the region. The oil producing countries had a lot of money and small populations and they were spending this money on luxary living and investing the excess on weapons to defend themselves against Iran. China advised them to use the money to industrialize their countries and as for security, instead of buying weapons, to develop good relations with Iran. China was helping these countries to come together, Saudi Arabia was getting closer to Iran with Chinese mediation. Most of these countries had joined BRICS as well. In the aftermath of the war these countries may have realised they cannot rely on the US for their security as the US is more concerned about the security of Israel.

Israeli Prime Minister  Netanyahu says he wants to extend Israel borders and occupy 70% of Gaza and parts of Syria and Lebanon. However, Israel cannot do any of this without US support. Israel has become very unpopular among Americans. Trump, who adopted an extreme pro-Israel policy, recognising the Golan Heights as part of Israel and Jeruselam as Israel’s capital, and covertly helped Israel to commit genocide in Gaza, may have to change his attitude towards Israel, despite Jewish lobby. Else his party may suffer electoral setbacks.

The US allies the UK, the EU, Canada, Australia and Japan did not join the war saying it was not their war. This again is very significant as these countries had been active partners in most wars that the US fought in countries such as Iraq, Libya, Syria. The Canadian Prime Minister had been critical of Trump’s policies and had shown that he is aware of the emerging new world order and the need to adapt to it. These Western powers may not have wanted to displease the emerging power China with whom they would like to do business.

What about Palestine, the forgotten reason for all this trouble; internationally enforced solutions rather than prolonged, stalled negotiations. Proposals have emerged pushing for specific plans, including the potential integration of administrative governance in Gaza, but implementation has stalled due to disagreements regarding the disarmament of armed groups.

Israel will be accepted in the Chinese led new development model if it agrees to a Palestine state with 1967 borders. All this augurs well for the developing new world order.

R.W. IEVERS (1850-1905), EXCEPTIONAL GOVERNMENT AGENT OF ANURADHAPURA (c. 1890).

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.