UNP responds to Daily FT Editorial of 20 July 2026

The United National Party has issued the following response to the Daily FT Editorial of 20 July 2026 titled “The Opposition needs ideas, not just unity” (https://www.ft.lk/ft_view__editorial/The-Opposition-needs-ideas-not-just-unity/58-794836)

The Editorial of the Daily FT of 20th July 2026 has already pronounced Ranil Wickremesinghe guilty of a ‘detour to England’. The facts are as follows:

As the 8th Executive President Ranil Wickremesinghe was returning from Havana and New York and transited through London and stayed overnight. During that period Wickremesinghe had accepted the invitation by Lord Swraj Paul, Vice Chancellor of Wolverhampton University to attend a function for his 25 years as Chancellor. The University had already confirmed that Wickremesinghe had been invited. He had taken part in the function. This was the main purpose of his visit. No charges have been presented to Wickremesinghe yet neither has any court found him guilty.

This is not the first time that the Editorial has targeted Mr Wickremesinghe on false claims.

There is another matter in the Editorial which must be raised which has no connection with the matter in reference to Wickremesinghe.

You have commented adversely on Presidents and Prime Ministers visiting Tirupati. This is one of the holiest shrines in South India visited by Sri Lankans both Hindu and Buddhists. Many Presidents and Prime Ministers have visited this shrine to pay their respects and in support of the Hindu religion just as much as they support the Dalada Maligawa. The Prime Ministers of Mauritius and Nepal also have visited Tirupati. I am surprised at the condemnation of this act of reconciliation by Heads of State and Government. This also shows an anti-Hindu approach of the Editorial in addition to being anti-Buddhist.

Editor’s Note: The Daily FT categorically denies UNP’s allegations that the newspaper has anti-Hindu or anti-Buddhist approach.  We call for objective reading of FT’s editorial.