Würth Lanka partners David Pieris’ “SpeedBay Circuit” as Platinum Partner

Würth Lanka (Pvt) Ltd, one of the leading brands in the automotive aftermarket space, recently partnered with “SpeedBay”, David Pieris Group of Companies’ motorsport arm as its “Platinum Partner”, enhancing its presence at the SpeedBay go-kart racing circuits at Pearl Bay in Bandaragama and Port City in Colombo. The agreement sealing this unique collaborative partnership was signed by Suranga Kekuluwalage – Managing Director/CEO of Würth Lanka (Pvt) Ltd., and Eshan Pieris – Chairman of David Pieris Racing & Leisure (Pvt) Ltd., in the presence of David Pieris – Founder & President of the David Pieris Group of Companies, Dhanuja Senadeera – Head of Branding, Chanaka Supun – Division Manager – Auto Division, Sanjeewa Edwards – National Sales Manager, Tharindu Rajapaksha – Division Manager – Trade Division and Teshini Bandara – Marketing Executive of Würth Lanka (Pvt) Ltd.

As part of the agreement, SpeedBay will provide a Würth-branded specialized racing suit, which must be worn during all karting sessions. The suit is designed to protect drivers from on-track incidents, including abrasions and impacts, ensuring the safety and well-being of every participant during each driving session.

“Our partnership will infuse a new level of positive energy to motorsport racing and the thrill seekers at the exciting and well-laid-out SpeedBay circuits while helping to take the thrill of racing and entertainment to the next level,” said Suranga Kekuluwalage, Managing Director/CEO, Würth Lanka (Pvt) Ltd.

Renowned for the unmatched quality and reliability of its products, Würth Lanka has long been the choice of champions — proudly sponsoring premier motorsport events and top racing talent at the forefront of Sri Lanka’s motor racing circuit.

SpeedBay’s racing circuit at Bandaragama is Sri Lanka’s only go-karting track built to FIA-CIK standards. The Asia Pacific Go-Karting Championship 2025 was held at Pearl Bay in Bandaragama, signifying the high level of acceptance afforded to SpeedBay from a regional motor sporting perspective. The SpeedBay circuit at the Port City is Colombo’s only go-karting circuit, offering the thrills of racing to motorsport fans.

Established in 1998, Würth Lanka (Pvt) Ltd is a fully owned subsidiary of Würth International, AG, and belongs to Adolf Würth GmbH, Germany, the parent company of the Würth Group. Würth is a Euro 20 billion company and one of the largest international trading companies with more than 400 subsidiaries in 80 countries. With over 87,000 employees worldwide, Würth has the largest direct sales force to be closer to its customers.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.