Tisara de Silva elected President-Elect of OPA for year 2025/2026

Tisara de Silva was elected with a clear majority of votes as the President-Elect of the Organisation of Professional Associations of Sri Lanka (OPA) for the year 2025/2026 at the AGM held on 31 October. De Silva was also the General Secretary of the OPA for the last two years and Chairman of the Premises Maintenance Committee. Previously, in 2022/2023, he was the Vice President of the OPA and Chairman of the Seminars, Workshops and Programmes Committee of the OPA. He has also served in the Executive Council for many years and in the OPA General Forum for 22 years.

The Organisation of Professional Associations of Sri Lanka was founded in 1975 and functions as the apex body of 52 professional associations representing 34 professions.

Tisara de Silva is a past student of Royal College, Colombo 7. He is also a Past President of the Pharmaceutical Society of Sri Lanka (PSSL) and has served in the PSSL Council for over 25 years, holding many positions such as President, Immediate Past President, President-Elect, Senior Vice President, Vice President, Assistant Secretary and Council Member, and is a pharmacist registered with the Sri Lanka Medical Council.

He has served in the pharmaceutical industry for more than 31 years and has worked at GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals, a leading multinational pharmaceutical company, as a Senior Manager for the past 27 years. He holds a Diploma in Modern Management from the UK, a Diploma in Computer Programming, and a Master’s Degree in Business Administration (MBA) from Malaysia.

He was a member of the Board of Trustees of the PSSL for several years. Currently, he is the Secretary of Pharmaceutical Sciences of the SEARPharm Forum (South East Asian Regional Pharmaceutical Forum) and a member of its Executive Council until 2027. From 2020 to 2022, he was also a Bureau Member of the Federation of Asian Pharmaceutical Associations (FAPA) and a Council Member of the International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP). He is also a member of the Commonwealth Pharmacists Association (CPA), United Kingdom, to date.

Tisara de Silva is also credited with being the first professional from the Pharmaceutical Society of Sri Lanka to be elected as the President-Elect of the Organisation of Professional Associations of Sri Lanka.