Establishing courts, closing schools

The government has decided to establish four more high courts, which will be located in four houses formerly used as official residences of ministers, in Colombo 07, according to media reports. There is a need for more well-equipped courts, given the inordinate law’s delays and the colossal backlog of cases that need to be cleared. There have been instances where some court cases dragged on for decades.

Athauda Seneviratne, who served as a Minister of Justice, once revealed it had taken nearly 40 years for a case over a land dispute involving him to be concluded. In 2016, the Tangalle High Court sentenced four individuals to death over a murder that had been committed in 1989! By the time most child abuse cases are concluded, the victims are married with children. This may be one of the reasons why the victims of sexual violence choose to suffer in silence. The same goes for corruption cases; many culprits go the way of all flesh before being convicted. There are many other such cases pending at present. Unless remedial measures are adopted to ensure that justice is delivered expeditiously, the erosion of public faith in the judicial process is bound to take a turn for the worse.

It is joked that lawyers live on dates, and many a true word is spoken in jest. The law’s delays are multifactorial in this country. What is needed is a multi-pronged strategy, but increasing the number of courts is surely a prerequisite for expeditious dispensation of justice.

However, shouldn’t institutions like courts be located away from residential areas for security and spatial reasons? There have been shooting incidents in and around courts. It has been revealed that underworld figure Keselbaddara Padme (Padmasiri Perera), who is currently being detained, planned to kill one of his rivals, Harak Kata (Nadun Wickremeratne), by attacking a prison bus with a claymore mine.

Is the government repurposing the former ministerial bungalows as courthouses to signal a political message?

While the government is in overdrive to establish more courts, pressure is mounting on it to abandon what the Opposition describes as a sinister plan to close down low-enrollment schools. The government has denied the charge, but President Anura Kumara Dissanayake argued for closing such schools permanently while waxing eloquent on the government’s educational reforms in Parliament in July 2025. He said, inter alia, that about 15% schools had fewer than 50 students each, and about two-thirds of schools had fewer than 100 students each, and a strategy to overcome the problem might necessitate permanent closure of some of those seats of learning

The Ceylon Teachers’ Union (CTU) is on the warpath, threatening a strike unless the government walks back its decision to go ahead with the proposed educational reforms. It says eight small schools have been closed in the North Central Province. CTU President Priyantha Fernando has said at a recent CTU event in Anuradhapura District that the incumbent government, which claims to espouse socialism, has done something that not even its predecessors described as agents of neoliberalism did. It says that as many as 1,500 small schools have been earmarked for closure, and downsizing the teacher service is one of the main conditions for a foreign loan amounting to USD 200 million. The government has not responded to this allegation.

If closing down schools is the solution to the problem of low enrollment, what is a government there for? After all, the JVP activists used to hold The First Teacher, (translated into Sinhala as ‘Guru Geethaya’), a poignant Russian novella, dear to their hearts. It is about the transformative power of education, sacrifices Duishen, a young revolutionary, makes to promote literacy and Marxist ideals among the rural folk, a small school he sets up for that purpose amidst resistance from conservative families, and the empowerment and success of Altynai, a village girl.

Ironically, the self-styled Duishens and Altyanais in the JVP-led government are accused of devising ways and means of closing down remote schools instead of developing them to unleash their emancipating potential for the benefit of the poverty-stricken rural communities. Going by the JVP’s rhetoric before last year’s elections, one may have expected its activists to serve as volunteer teachers in underprivileged schools under an NPP government.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.