Billingsgate in the House

Sri Lankan lawmakers, more often than not, are in the news for the wrong reasons. Most of them do not seem to take their legislative duties and functions seriously if their flippant attitude as well as misconduct is any indication. Their theatrics and facetious remarks that pass for witticism make their parliamentary speeches assume the characteristics of low comedies. Worse, debates are replete with unparliamentary language, which has apparently become the norm.

No wonder the Speaker often sees red and issues warnings to the unruly MPs, albeit in vain. The errant MPs do not care to mend their ways. Sadly, they receive more media attention than the few others who conduct themselves properly and speak sense during parliamentary debates. The blame for this sorry state of affairs should be apportioned to the media. Perhaps, social media is more to blame, for the MPs who behave like overgrown schoolboys, do it for the algorithm. Their rage-baiting tactics seem to work.

The Speaker’s job may be as stressful as that of a traffic policeman on a chaotic road in Colombo. Hardly a parliamentary sitting passes without the Chair having to censure a few dozen MPs for unparliamentary conduct. Speaker Dr. Jagath Wickramaratne yesterday warned the MPs against the use of billingsgate in the House for the umpteenth time, according to our front-page lead news item today. His consternation is understandable.

Efforts of successive Speakers to enforce discipline have been in vain. Theirs has been a Sisyphean task. Strangely, the leaders of the political parties, represented in Parliament, remain unconcerned although it is their duty to ensure that their members maintain parliamentary decorum.

One of the main reasons why the people voted for the NPP overwhelmingly in the last parliamentary election, giving it a supermajority, is its pledge to cleanse Parliament. The NPP embarked on what it called a Parliament clean-up campaign and craftily tapped into people’s resentment at the legislature. But there has been no radical departure from the rotten political culture the people have rejected. Parliamentary debates descend into slanging matches, with the MPs trading insults liberally. Questions from the Opposition often go unanswered. Vital agreements the government enters into with other countries are not presented to Parliament. The rights of the Opposition are not respected. Yesterday, Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa said he had been denied an opportunity to clarify his party’s position on the government proposal to grant an attendance incentive to estate workers with state funds.

What both the government and the Opposition must bear in mind is that the people’s patience is wearing thin, and anti-politics is on the rise. They must work together to restore public trust in Parliament. People do not reason when they are driven by a deep distrust towards the formal political institutions, political parties and office-holders, as was seen in this country about three years ago. In Madagascar, a popular uprising led to the collapse of not only an unpopular government but also a fragile civilian rule, two months ago. That East African nation now has a military junta to contend with.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.