China’s Xi and India’s Modi in landmark meeting at BRICS Summit

Chinese President Xi Jinping (left) with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi

Chinese President Xi Jinping makes four observations on promoting steady and sustained development of China-India relations

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi says India always views relations with China from strategic and long-term perspective; hopes to be a partner, not rival, of China

Chinese President Xi Jinping on Saturday met with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi while attending the 18th BRICS Summit in New Delhi, India.

The two leaders had a sincere and in-depth exchange of views and reached the important consensus that China and India should be partners.

President Xi pointed out that China always approaches and develops its relations with India from a strategic and long-term perspective.

He said: “Over the past two years, I have met with Prime Minister Modi twice, guiding the bilateral relations from starting afresh to making further improvements. The institutional exchanges between the two countries have gradually resumed, the cooperation list has continued to lengthen, and the bilateral trade volume has hit a new high. This situation has not come easily and needs to be cherished. China and India have different national realities. We should draw on each other’s strengths, support each other, help each other succeed, and develop together. In the face of the changing and turbulent international landscape, the world’s two most populous countries and important members of the Global South shoulder important responsibilities. Both sides should keep in mind the future of humanity and the well-being of the people, and work together to promote the high-quality development of greater BRICS cooperation, so as to contribute more positive energy to promoting world peace, stability, development, and prosperity.”

President Xi made four observations on promoting the steady and sustained development of China-India relations.

First, calibrate the direction with an objective and rational strategic perception. China and India are partners rather than rivals, and development opportunities rather than threats to each other. This is a strategic judgment made based on the development stage and international environment of the two countries, and one that conforms to the common interests of the two countries and the two peoples.

Second, help each other succeed in the spirit of win-win cooperation. Both sides should focus on development as the greatest common denominator, and strengthen friendly exchanges and mutually beneficial cooperation. It is important to expand cooperation in people-to-people exchanges, direct flights, and other areas to effectively improve the public perception of the bilateral relations. The two sides should also address each other’s economic and trade concerns in a balanced way and promote the sound and steady development of economic and trade relations.

Third, remove irritants with the political wisdom of mutual respect and mutual understanding. The two sides should stay committed to advancing bilateral relations and resolving the boundary question, seek parallel, mutually reinforcing progress, and maintain peace and tranquility in the border areas.

Fourth, contribute to a better world with open and inclusive multilateral coordination. The two sides should support each other’s BRICS chairship, strengthen coordination in the UN, the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, and the G20, work together to address global challenges, and unequivocally uphold international fairness and justice.

Prime Minister Modi recalled the many productive meetings he has had with President Xi, which have guided India-China relations in a positive direction and serve the common interests of the over 2.8 billion people of the two countries.

Modi said: “As two major civilisations, India and China have engaged in exchanges and mutual learning and moved forward hand in hand for thousands of years. India always views its relations with China from a strategic and long-term perspective. It hopes to be a partner, not a rival, of China, and regards each other’s development as an opportunity, not a challenge. India has an independent foreign policy, and developing relations with China is not affected by any third party. India’s policy and position on issues relating to Taiwan and Tibet remain unchanged, and it will not allow any force to engage in anti-China activities on its territory. The Indian side would like to work with China on the basis of mutual respect and mutual trust to maintain high-level exchanges, strengthen strategic communication, promote mutually beneficial cooperation, and deepen people-to-people exchanges, so that the bilateral relations will enjoy greater development. The two sides should work together to maintain peace and tranquillity in the border areas. India appreciates China’s support for its hosting the BRICS Summit, and will fully support China’s BRICS chairship next year. India will maintain close coordination and collaboration with China to jointly promote stronger Global South cooperation, advance world multipolarity and economic growth, and act as a force for stability and progress in a turbulent world.”