New rabies law ends arbitrary killing of animals on suspicion, veterinarian says

Colombo, September 17 (Daily Mirror) - Animals suspected of having rabies can no longer be arbitrarily killed or shot by police merely on suspicion under Sri Lanka’s newly introduced legislation on rabies control and dog registration, Veterinary Surgeon and Animal Welfare Coalition (AWC) Executive Member Dr. Chamith Nanayakkara said.

Dr. Nanayakkara said the new Elimination of Rabies and Registration of Dogs Bill repeals the decades-old Rabies Ordinance (Chapter 476) and introduces a system based on veterinary examination, observation and scientific intervention. The Bill was gazetted on September 7, 2026.

He said the previous legislation had given police officers powers to destroy dogs that were sick or suspected of having rabies, while provisions also allowed animals to be killed in certain circumstances based on suspicion.

“Animals can no longer be killed or shot by the police simply on suspicion of having rabies,” Dr. Nanayakkara said.

He explained that under the new provisions, dogs suspected of having rabies and found in public places are to be captured and transferred to designated detention and observation facilities rather than being killed immediately.

According to Dr. Nanayakkara, the animals must then undergo periodic examinations by a government veterinary surgeon to determine whether they are infected with rabies.

He said euthanasia would only be permitted where a government veterinary surgeon confirms that an animal is infected with rabies and considers it necessary to prevent a danger to the public. The procedure must be carried out by the government veterinary surgeon or a person authorised by the veterinarian.

“Rabies control is now governed by scientific, humane and veterinary medical protocols,” he said.

Dr. Nanayakkara further said that dogs confirmed to be free of rabies are to be vaccinated, sterilised and released back to the location from which they were captured, in accordance with the new provisions.

The new legislation also introduces mandatory annual rabies vaccination and registration of dogs, while placing greater responsibility on local authorities and dog owners for rabies prevention and dog population management.

The Bill also provides for the repeal of the existing Rabies Ordinance and Dog Registration Ordinance, replacing the previous legal framework with a comprehensive system covering rabies elimination, vaccination, dog registration, sterilisation and regulation of commercial breeding.

Dr. Nanayakkara said that the new framework means that suspicion of rabies alone should not be treated as grounds for the arbitrary killing of an animal.

“No one has the legal authority to arbitrarily kill, have the police shoot, or inflict cruelty upon animals based on a suspicion of rabies,” he said.