Thailand trade deficit widens as imports surge, baht strengthens

-The Edge Malaysia:Thailand posted a higher-than-expected trade deficit for a second month as a jump in imports outpaced sluggish export growth, underscoring economic risks including a stronger baht that threatens competitiveness.

The trade deficit last month was US$2.73 billion (RM11 billion), exceeding the US$1.36 billion forecast in a Bloomberg survey of economists. The nation’s trade balance swung to a US$3.4 billion deficit in October, the biggest gap since January 2023.

The country’s exports grew just 7.1%, missing estimates, while overall imports jumped 17.6%, exceeding expectations. A sustained trade deficit threatens to weigh on Thailand’s growth as a stronger baht undermines export competitiveness. With exports accounting for more than half of gross domestic product, the economy is highly exposed to currency strength and shifts in global demand. Thai shipments to the US, the country’s largest export market, jumped 38% in November from a year earlier to US$6.47 billion as investment in artificial intelligence infrastructure boosted demand for electronic products and parts, according to the commerce ministry. Shipments of those products surged 157% from a year earlier to US$5.24 billion.

Prime Minister Anutin Charnvirakul has pushed to improve Thailand’s trade terms with the US while managing ties with President Donald Trump, who has sought to press Bangkok into a peace deal with neighboring Cambodia. With elections in February, Anutin has resisted concessions over the border dispute, with his government saying Trump agreed to keep peace talks separate from trade negotiations.

Access Engineering gets contract for 615-unit housing project in Kirulapone

Inaugural flight from Poland to Sri Lanka for winter season lands at BIA

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.