Sri Lanka At 2025: Bouquets Outnumber Brickbats In AKD’s Performance

The year 2025 will be remembered in Sri Lanka for Cyclone Ditwah, which struck the Sri Lanka coast towards the end of November. The heavy rain and landslides during the cyclone presents a grim picture: 644 people losing their lives, 18 injured, while 183 people were missing. The World Bank has estimated initial damage from the disaster at around $4.1 billion.

During the years 2023-24, the nation was preoccupied with recovering from economic bankruptcy and it coloured the political narrative for nearly two years. Recovering from the after-effect of Cyclone Ditwah is likely to dominate the political narrative during the years 2025-26, particularly if the overdue provincial council elections are held.

The year 2025 will also be the year AKD surprised everyone, showing rare maturity and pragmatism in continuing with the debt restructuring largely designed by his predecessor Ranil Wickremesinghe to satisfy the norms of the IMF. So, it was not surprising that the IMF approved $ 206 million Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI). Sri Lanka has formally assured the IMF that it will preserve fiscal discipline. UN development partners have promised $ 35 million Humanitarian Priorities Plan (HPP) for nearly 1.2 million victims of Cyclone Ditwah. By December, the government has received $ 20 million of funds, mostly channelled through the UN by its development partners.

Most of the disaster relief efforts of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake government were covered in last month’s Sri Lanka Perspectives. India’s massive disaster relief Operation Sagar Bandhu launched in the wake of the cyclone continued during the month of December 2025 too. It culminated with the visit of India’s External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar to Colombo on December 23. During the visit, he announced an assistance package of $ 450 million including $ 100 million as an outright grant. Before the year ended, India has announced a doubling of financial commitment to three housing projects, benefitting over 1550 families in the Northern and Southern Provinces. India’s real time response, as Kishantha Prashantha Cooray in his FT article says was a “substantive reaffirmation of a Sri Lanka–India partnership built on the bedrock of strategic reliability.”

Not to be outdone by India, China was ready for “disaster diplomacy” with the arrival of a 11-member delegation led by Wang Junzheng, Member of the 20th Central Committee of the CPC and Secretary of the CPC Committee of the Xizang (Tibet) Autonomous Region on December 23. The 11-member delegation met with President Dissanayake to discuss deepening mutual understanding and regional collaboration and visited Galle. A week earlier, the National People’s Congress delegation led by Wang Dongming, Vice Chairman of the Standing Committee of the NPC, from December 16. Its purpose was to reaffirm commitment to high-quality Belt and Road Initiative cooperation and to enhance exchanges between the legislative bodies of both countries. The delegation met with President Dissanayake and Prime Minister Harini Amarasuriya. Similarly, a Guangdong Trade and Industry Delegation visited around November 21. It was led by Zhuang Lecong, Deputy Director General of Industry and IT of Guangdong Province. They held discussions with the Sri Lanka Export Development Board (EDB) to invite Chinese investment and provide more opportunities for Sri Lankan SMEs to participate in international trade fairs in China.

It is to be noted, by the end of 2025, China’s activity in Sri Lanka has shifted from the high-interest loan model of the past toward equity-based investments and strategic stabilization. During his Beijing visit in January 2025, President Dissanayake reaffirmed the “Strategic Cooperative Partnership.” In an attempt to balance ties between China and India, he emphasized an “independent non-aligned foreign policy,”

During the year, Sri Lanka lifted its one-year moratorium on foreign research vessels. This has allowed Chinese so-called ‘scientific vessels’ to dock. The spy ships are required to adhere to new “standard operating procedures” (SOPs) to ensure transparency.

In early 2025, Sri Lanka successfully finalized its external debt restructuring. China, as the largest bilateral creditor, participated in “parallel” negotiations, agreed to extend repayment periods and lower interest rate. The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) and the People’s Bank of China renewed a major currency swap agreement in January 2025, providing a vital liquidity buffer for Sri Lanka’s recovering foreign reserves.

As of 2025, China has surpassed India as Sri Lanka’s largest source of imports, accounting for roughly 23.7% of the country’s total import bill. Sri Lankan imports from China were mainly nitrogenous fertilizers, refined petroleum and electronics. Sri Lanka is trying to increase its exports to China, focusing on Ceylon Tea, activated carbon, and seafood. In 2025, Sri Lanka signed new protocols to facilitate the export of more agricultural products to the Chinese market, though no progress towards signing a comprehensive Free Trade Agreement.

During the year 2025, China’s two mega projects in Sri Lanka – the Sinopec refinery and the Port City Special Economic Zone (SEZ) – reached critical operational milestones. The $3.7 Billion Sinopec Refinery project located in Hambantota, is the single largest foreign direct investment (FDI) in Sri Lanka’s history. The project was fast-tracked during the state visit of President Dissanayake in January 2025.

The Sinopec refinery is designed as a greenfield project to process 200,000 barrels per day. The 100 percent Chinese funded venture included an integrated petrochemical complex and a crude oil storage terminal with direct pipeline connectivity to the Hambantota Port operated by China Merchants Port Holdings. Sinopec hopes to locally market up to 40 percent of oil production when the project is completed in three years.

As of 2025, China has surpassed India as Sri Lanka’s largest source of imports, accounting for roughly 23.7% of the country’s total import bill. Sri Lankan imports from China were mainly nitrogenous fertilizers, refined petroleum and electronics. Sri Lanka is trying to increase its exports to China, focusing on Ceylon Tea, activated carbon, and seafood. In 2025, Sri Lanka signed new protocols to facilitate the export of more agricultural products to the Chinese market. However, there was no progress in the decade-long negotiations to sign a comprehensive Free Trade Agreement.

The year 2025 has seen surprising positive growth in many sectors of the country. Tourism sector crossed a historic milestone with the arrival of 2,333,797th tourist for 2025,surpassing the record of 2,333,796 visitors set in 2018. This has buoyed SL’s tourism authorities, who have set an ambitious revenue target of US $ 4.5 billion for 2026, aiming to attract 2.7 million visitors. The focus will now be on high-spending demographics and untapped geographical markets.

Marine traffic is another marker of the country’s economic health. Total container volumes handled by the Colombo Port rose 7.1% year-on-year (YoY) to 6.92 million 20-foot Equivalent Units (TEUs) in the first 10 months of 2025. supported by a strong expansion in domestic container traffic, even as transhipment activity continued to account for the bulk of throughput and remain central to Colombo’s regional hub role. Transhipment container volumes increased 5.1% YoY to 5.52 million TEUs during the Jan–Oct period, up from 5.25 mil TEUs a year earlier.

Sri Lanka Customs’ revenue collection surpassed Rs. 2.49 trillion as on December 26, marking a historic milestone in the Govt’s fiscal performance. Customs exceeded its original annual revenue target of Rs. 2,115 billion in early Nov 2025. The Finance Ministry’s revised target of Rs. 2,231 billion, was also surpassed by 26 December, with total collections reaching Rs. 2,497 billion.

Apparel industry has delivered a healthy growth of 5.42% during the first 11 months of 2025. Its cumulative exports have reached $ 4,571.99 million in the period.

Ethnic reconciliation: Unfortunately, AKD has not done enough in 2025 on this count. I can dust up my recommendation in 2023 and say the least AKD can do is to implement the recommendations of the LLRC report in full. It requires neither amending or revising the constitution. As I said at the end of 2023, “it will reassure not only the people, but also the international community that Sri Lanka is serious about ethnic reconciliation.” But AKD is unlikely to do it in 2026 as he appears to be a little confused as Rajapaksas might revive the ethnic scare to recoup Sinhala ethnic support during the next elections.

Crime and punishment: While the long arm of law still could not find former minister John Fernando, for misuse of a bus, the CID has booked former minister Douglas Devananda, leader of the Eelam Peoples Democratic Party. He is now remanded until January 9, 2026. The CID arrested him after his personal firearm provided by the Sri Lanka Army in 2001 when he was a minister reportedly fell into the hands of members of an organized criminal gang. The pistol was found concealed in a forested area near a culvert in Weliweriya. The CID has also launched an investigation into 19 more firearms issued by the Sri Lanka Army to Devananda.

*Col R Hariharan VSM, a retired MI specialist on South Asia and terrorism, served as the head of intelligence of the Indian Peace Keeping Force in Sri Lanka 1987-90. He is associated with the Chennai Centre for China Studies.