American words gaining currency in English

The place is a tourist hotel in the South. An American tourist asks the receptionist, “Where’s the elevator?” After some hesitation, the receptionist replies, “Sir, the lift is over there.” It is not clear whether she knew that ‘elevator’ is the American word for ‘lift’ in British English. Anyway, there was no misunderstanding. Many tourist hotels and private hospitals prefer the word elevator to lift. Maybe the American word is more fashionable than the British English word lift.

English is now spoken throughout the world as a native language, second language or foreign language. English was once the language of a small island off the coast of Europe. However, over the centuries it has become the main language of communication in many countries. With the expansion of the British Empire English spread across the world. When a language spreads differences occur in the way it is used. For instance, there is British English, American English, Australian English, Singaporean English, Indian English and Sri Lankan English. However, the two major varieties of the language are the British English (BrE) and American English (AmE).

The differences between British English and American English fall into different categories. The main difference is found in spelling. When you go on a journey, you are a traveller (BrE), but a traveler in American English. When you fly, you travel in an aeroplane (BrE) or an airplane (AmE). You write a cheque (BrE) in order to pay for something. An American will write a check for the same purpose. You buy jewellery (BrE)) for a wedding. In American English jewellery is spelt as jewelry. Manoeuvre (BrE) is a difficult movement that requires skill and judgment to perform.

Americans have shortened the word as maneuver. Moustache (BrE) means the hair on a man’s upper lip. In American English it is spelt as mustache. A peddler (BrE) is a person who goes from house to house selling small items. In American English such a person is known as a pedlar. If you are a sceptic (BrE), you will doubt about the truth of religious teachings. In America you find many skeptics. One layer of a building is called a storey (BrE), but in American English it is spelt as story.

British spelling rules differ from those of American English. Many words of Latin and Greek origin are spelt with ‘ae’ or ‘oe’ in British English but ‘e’ alone in American English. Behaviour and colour in British English are used in American English as behavior and color. The word centre (BrE) becomes center in American English. The colour grey (BrE) is spelt gray in American English. Marvellous (BrE) becomes marvelous in American English. Aluminium (BrE) is a light silvery-grey metal. In American English it is called aluminum. The list of such words is endless.

There are some grammatical differences between British English and American English. There are a number of nouns that are used in the singular in British English but in the plural in American English.

Among them are accommodation (BrE) and accommodations in American English. The word wood (BrE) means an area covered in trees. The plural form woods is used in American English. For some nouns the opposite is true. Maths is a plural noun in British English, but math in American English is a singular noun. In British English singular words ending in ‘ache’ are treated as mass nouns. Therefore the indefinite article ‘a’ or ‘an’ is not used with them. In American English words ending in ‘ache’ are treated as count nouns and they are preceded by ‘a’ or ‘an.’ When we say She has got toothache, Americans say She has got a toothache. In American English the word ‘one’ is followed by he, his or himself. In British English ‘one’ is followed by one, one’s or oneself.

In both British and American English the preposition ‘on’ is used when naming the day when something happens: The Bribery Commission said on Monday that it would file a case against the former minister. In American English the preposition ‘on’ is usually omitted: President Trump said Monday he would launch an independent investigation into the matter. In British English the word ‘home’ is used when the idea is that of being there. The word ‘home’ on its own is used when the idea is of going there: She stayed at home. In American English ‘home’ can be used without the preposition ‘at’: I am going to stay home tonight.

Punctuation is another area where the differences between British English and American English are prominent. In British English the dot at the end of a sentence is called ‘full stop.’ In American English it is called ‘period.’ In American English full stops are used in most abbreviations: Mr., Dr. and Mrs. However, such full stops are not used in British English: Mr, Dr and Mrs. In British English the word following a colon starts with a simple letter whereas in American English a colon is followed by a capital letter.

In British English the dates are written in figures. The order is usually day, month and year. In American English the order is usually month, day and year. The use of the hash mark in British English and pound sign in American English means ‘number.’ The hash mark is very popular among advertisers.

Despite such differences, Americans read British books and newspapers without difficulty. Similarly, those who have studied British English can easily understand American books, magazines, films and songs. The barriers between British English and American English are breaking down.

However, those who are learning English are uncertain about which words or spellings are used in British English. Difficulties mainly occur when they write essays and answer questions in public examination. If you are not sure of the correct British spelling, always consult the Oxford Dictionary.

As the student population is exposed to American English through the use of the Internet and mobile phones, they have to be educated about the British spelling rules and expressions. If the authorities fail to educate them properly, future generations will use a hotchpotch of British English and American English.

How Lee Kuan Yew turned a small island into a global powerhouse

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.