Enfection pioneers hybrid AI ads for vivid storytelling

The world of commercials is rapidly evolving as artificial intelligence reshapes how brands connect with audiences. Yet, amidst the surge of fully AI-generated videos, a new model is emerging; one that blends authentic storytelling with AI innovation. This hybrid approach has taken centre stage through Keells supermarkets’ latest campaign; the World Flavourites, produced by MarTech company Enfection.

The project marked one of the first in Sri Lanka and in the region of South Asia as well; using cinematic production that anchored emotional resonance with real actors, while using AI to enhance scenes in ways traditional production could not. The result is a balance between cost efficiency and high-quality production, by reducing the need for heavy resources and complex VFX, while still preserving a strong human connection.

“This isn’t about choosing between AI and traditional filmmaking, it’s about blending them to create the next generation of storytelling,” said Irshad Packeer, Head of Creative Technology at Enfection. “The hybrid path is the smart way forward, it delivers innovation while keeping the human connection that audiences trust.”

For Keells, the approach proved to be both cost-efficient and scalable, allowing greater investment in creativity rather than heavy post-production. “This campaign showed us that the future of production isn’t AI or human creativity, it’s the right blend of both,” said Saad Jeffry Ahamed, Junior Lead of the Client Success Team at Enfection. “None of this would have been possible without Keells giving us the opportunity and trust to try a Hybrid AI commercial for the very first time. Together, we’ve set a new benchmark for authentic, agile storytelling.”

Globally, the shift towards AI in video is accelerating. According to eMarketer, nearly 40% of video ads will be built or enhanced with generative AI by 2026, up from 22% in 2024. Meanwhile, Precedence Research projects the AI video market to grow from USD 7.6 billion in 2024 to over USD 150 billion by 2034. Against this backdrop, trailblazers like Enfection are showing how hybrid models can offer brands a safer, more effective path into AI adoption.

The Keells World Flavourites campaign demonstrates how creativity and technology can converge to deliver storytelling that is both spectacular and believable. This signals a new benchmark in how AI can be harnessed responsibly to shape the future of brand communication.

WindForce acquires 51 percent stake in Safe Power International to develop 10 MW wind power project

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.