Quitting the UNP and battling in the Supreme Court to save our seats

We received a signal from Mangala (Samaraweera) that the time was opportune for us to make a move (out of the UNP). Accordingly a minibus was arranged to take us from Elle Gunawansa’s temple to Temple Trees (TT) for a reception and a meeting with CBK. I thought it unwise to get individuals to drive into TT as it could end up with mishaps leading to the unraveling of the whole enterprise. Hence the bus ride.

Sure enough Susil drove up to Gunawansa’s temple and said that since he had not discussed this move with his wife Sumi, who was then in England, he had reservations about joining us at that time. I assured him that Sumi could be persuaded to agree and that I will get CBK to phone her personally to London and clear it with her. Since Susil was a long standing friend of the Bandaranaikes my impetuous assurance about CBKs persuasive powers seemed to work and he somewhat reluctantly got into the minibus.

Though we had not planned it that way a large number of Provincial Councilors and senior UNPers also followed us to TT. This was not surprising because particularly Wijepala Mendis and Nanda Mathew were long standing UNP leaders with their own followers. This became clear when our “Gang of Four” was joined by another MP, Chula Bandara from Kurunegala district, who was protesting some injustice done to him. (A few days later he was inveigled back to the UNP presumably on a promise of redressing his grievances). Any way by that time the damage vis-a-vis the media was done and Bandara disappeared into the UNP dungeon and was not heard of again.

We were delighted when Professor Stanley Kalpage a UNP “grandee” who had been a favourite of JRJ, also joined us and added to the considerable gathering in TT. We received a cordial and well choreographed reception which was beamed live through TV to the country, adding to the discomfiture of the leaders of the Grand Old Party. In the evening we attended a meeting with a large gathering of monks near the Buddha statue of Elle Gunawansa’s temple and a large group of onlookers who had spontaneously gathered alongside the road below.

Senior monks from all three Nikayas participated and I was especially touched when the Mahanayake of Malwatte sent as a special representative – his secretary – the eloquent Niyangoda Wijithasiri, to convey his blessings. The official blessing from Malwatte added much to our credibility both with UNP supporters and our new hosts – CBK and the Peoples Alliance. We had a national status higher than other parties which had joined the SLFP led People’s Alliance and were represented in the CBK Cabinet.

We then organized ourselves as “The Alternate UNP” with DS and Dudley Senanayake as our icons. Wijepala Mendis who by then had set up an office in Boyd Place was made President and I functioned as its Secretary. I strategized that we should have daily press briefings so that we could keep our group in the limelight. Every day new groupings who broke away from the UNP – trade unionists, lawyers, teachers, provincial politicians and artists were presented at these meetings and the media was more than happy to make it front page news despite the attempts of UNP leaders to put a lid on it.

We then held a convention which was well attended as we brought supporters from our electorates to pack the hall. No doubt all this delighted the People’s Alliance which was apprehensive of the coming election. Chandrikas authorized biography entitled “CBK” says the following, “It was clear that the Presidential election of 1999 would be substantially different from 1994. The goodwill that brought CBK to power had largely dissipated and while most talk during the election was of peace, CBKs armed forces commanders were doing their best to unintentionally botch her re-election”.

I can relate here an interesting encounter which throws some light on our influence at that time. In the course of meeting Ambassadors posted in Colombo we had a lengthy session with the Indian High Commissioner Shivshankar Menon, who was one of the best Indian representatives to be assigned to Colombo. He treated us with great courtesy and ended the sessions with the statement; “Yesterday I sent a dispatch to Delhi that Ranil will most likely win the coming election. But after this meeting I will inform them that I have changed my assessment”.

When I queried him as to why it was so, he replied, “Look at your composition. Sarath is Kandyan Goigama. Susil is low country Goigama. Mendis is Salagama and Nanda is Wahumpura. It is a cross section of the Sinhala electorate and it will affect the results on election day”. As we received invitations to address PA meetings all over the country, Menon’s assessment seemed at least partially true. Some PA ministers arranged for meetings for our group to “go solo” so that UNP supporters could participate while retaining their party affiliations. Indeed many UNP organizers supported our outstation meetings though they did not get on to the stage for fear of party retribution.

Party retribution was not long in coming. We were sacked forthwith and the Commissioner of Elections was informed that in terms of the country’s constitution our vacancies were to be filled by substitutes whose names were intimated to him. However we were allowed a month’s time to appeal against this decision to the Supreme Court. We jointly decided to take that course of action and retained former Solicitor General Elanga Wikremanayake as our lead lawyer.

At this juncture we were greatly assisted by my friend Nigel Hatch, a brilliant young lawyer who had been an advisor to Gamini Dissanayake. He added Gomin Dayasri to our legal team. The UNP retained Kasi Choksy who had successfully ensured the removal of Gamini and Lalith from Parliament in similar circumstances under the Premadasa regime. But since we had time enough to devote to this litigation we concentrated on campaigning for CBK countrywide, occasionally joining her in helicopter rides to far away locations.

In the above case we challenged our expulsions from the UNP before the Supreme Court under the special procedure introduced by article 99 of the second republican constitution of 1978. Our lawyers had to contend with an earlier Supreme Court decision regarding the fate of Gamini Dissanayake and eight others who had been expelled from the UNP in 1993. “This challenge is described by Nigel Hatch in an article in the following way. “The majority of the Supreme Court upheld the summary expulsion… thereby recognizing the primacy of the political party over the individual MP. The majority further held that the failure of the UNP to follow the principles of natural justice and failure to give them a prior hearing was legitimate on the grounds of urgency and being impractical because it would have been a useless formality having regard to what the majority considered as the openly defiant conduct of the Petitioners.”

However our lawyers felt that they “should nevertheless focus on impugning the expulsions for the failure to observe the principles of natural justice”. Fortunately for us Nigel was able to secure a copy of the UNP constitution including the party guidelines for the conduct of disciplinary inquiries which provided for procedural and substantive fairness and the right to be heard before disciplinary sanctions were imposed. The failure to serve a charge sheet and denial of a prior hearing before the expulsion was thus emphasized. It was also urged that here was a denial of an opportunity to explain their conduct and contradict the evidence if any. It was also submitted that the sanction of expulsion was disproportionate”.

The bench was made up of ARB Amerasinghe, acting Chief Justice, Justice Shiranee Bandaranayake and Justice Ameer Ismail. They unanimously held on February 3, 2000 that the expulsion of all the petitioners were invalid. The party guidelines were quoted in the judgment and the judges found that the UNP had acted in breach of them. “The guidelines of the party prescribed a process for disciplinary action to ensure fairness and as a condition of membership it was expected that the usual process would be duly followed” they said. Amerasinghe wrote a long discourse on the central issue of natural justice which ended by saying, “Only Radamanthus, the cruel judge of hell, it seems punished before he heard.”

It was an indictment of how dictatorial the leadership of the UNP had become. The judges also dealt with the principal grounds adduced by the UNP to justify summary expulsions, namely “uselessness and urgency”. “The court determined that perhaps after hearing the petitioners fairly the UNP may have concluded that all the talk about a national government was a sham and the result may have been the same. Yet since the decision was not arrived fairly it must therefore be set aside.” Having regard to the fact that Amunugama and the other petitioners were MPs “the very gravity of the matter required that at least a limited hearing was given to the petitioners before a decision was taken to expel them”.

This judgment came as a shock to the UNP as well as other political parties. The judgment of the Gamini et al case of 1993 regarding issues such as “uselessness and urgency” was brought under the wider consideration of the primacy of “natural justice”. Another fact was that most political parties had sloppy regulations about disciplinary actions particularly in respect of the correct competent authority to render a verdict in the case of such transgressions. In effect Amarasinghe and his colleagues overturned the judgement against Gamini et al in 1993, which as a senior lawyer told me, was at that time rendered under the watchful eyes of President Premadasa.

I recalled what heartburn this judgment had created in Lalith and Gamini who were my colleagues in the DUNF I was happy to have been in a way the instrument by which they stood vindicated though they were no longer in the land of the living.

The aforesaid judgement was widely welcomed and the UNP was embarrassed. I know that several seniors of the party blamed Ranil for my departure. It was particularly galling for him as the UNP had fared badly in the ensuing Presidential and Parliamentary elections. This judgment paved the way for many crossovers from the UNP to the PA under President Mahinda Rajapaksa which thereby decimated the UNP. A large number of UNPers led by Karu Jayasuriya crossed over to the government to assist in the war against the LTTE.

It was an irony that Karu, who was the defendant in our case as Chairman of the UNP, had benefited from our judgment when he had to plead his case in the Supreme Court. In one instance Rohitha Bogollagama who too depended on the above mentioned judgment to retain his seat, wanted me to be present in court during his hearings to send a “subliminal message” to the bench about our earlier success. Popular opinion had it that it was Chief Justice Sarath Silva who delivered the judgment. It was not so and poor Sarath had to deny many times that he had not rendered a possible constitutional intention nugatory. He emphasized that the presiding judge was ARB Amerasinghe [whom the grapevine maintained was a pro UNP judge] though he stated quite candidly that he agreed fully with the reasoning in the judgement and the final verdict.

A touching detail about this case was that it was the last appearance of Elanga Wikremanayake who crowned his long and distinguished career with success in our landmark case. There is a sad end to this tale. Though we were successful in this case, of the five petitioners only I was returned to Parliament in the ensuing general election. I therefore had the rare distinction of being sent to Parliament by both the UNP and the SLFP. I must say that CBK was more than generous with our group. Susil was appointed the Ambassador to Iran while Nanda Mathew became the Governor of Uva. Bandara who preferred to follow a different path went back to the UNP but was defeated at the polls. Mendis retired gracefully from the political arena and died soon after.

(Excerpted from Volume 3 of the Sarath Amunugama autobiography) ✍️

A question of “culling” surplus cattle in govt. farms & handling appeals

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.