Way to go! More to be done

The law finally caught up with former Deputy Minister Sarana Gunawardena, who caused losses to the state through some questionable deals, two decades ago. He was found guilty on four counts of corruption charges and sentenced to 16 years of rigorous imprisonment by the Colombo High Court, on Tuesday. The Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC) had filed four cases against him for causing losses to the state coffers during his tenure as Chairman of the Development Lotteries Board during the Mahinda Rajapaksa government, in 2006. The CIABOC stated that he had acted in a manner that provided an undue advantage to some individuals when obtaining vehicles on rent for the institution.

When Gunawardena committed those offences, he may not have thought he would have to face the consequences of his actions. He is not alone in having enriched himself at the expense of the public; many are those who have amassed colossal amounts of ill-gotten wealth through corrupt means while in power. It is hoped that all of them will be brought to justice.

The deterrent sentence handed down to Gunawardena must have gladdened the hearts of all those who dream of a country free from bribery and corruption. The economic cost of corruption in Sri Lanka has not been estimated. But corruption has obviously hindered economic progress. The IMF and the World Bank have pointed out that corruption discourages foreign direct investment, increases cost of public infrastructure, reduces efficiency of state-owned enterprises, and weakens competition and productivity. So, a strategy to develop the economy consists in a truly national effort to battle bribery and corruption with might and main.

The CIABOC went all out to bring Gunawardena to justice, and it deserves praise for its relentless efforts. Does this mean that the culture of impunity is over and the rule of law has finally been restored under the present dispensation? The answer is in the negative. Most corruption cases that have culminated in convictions were filed prior to the 2024 regime change.

It is imperative that the CIABOC act swiftly and decisively in the case against former Energy Minister Kumara Jayakody, whom it has indicted on two counts: facilitating a private company to make undue financial profits and causing a loss of over Rs 8.8 million to the state while serving as the procurement manager of the Lanka Fertiliser Company in 2016. The CIABOC has not been entirely free from allegations of selective efficiency in handling corruption cases. Jayakody was not arrested. He obtained bail after indictment.

Over the last year and a half or so, the CIABOC has successfully prosecuted several former ministers. In April 2025, the Colombo High Court sentenced former Chief Minister of the North Central Province S. M. Ranjith Samarakoon and his secretary to 16 years RI for obtaining fuel fraudulently and causing losses to the state. In May 2025, the Colombo High Court Trial-at-Bar sentenced former Minister Mahindananda Aluthgamage and former Sathosa Chairman and ex-Minister Nalin Fernando to 20 years RI and 25 years RI, respectively, for causing a loss of Rs. 53 million to the state by using public funds to purchase 14,000 carrom boards and 11,000 checkers boards purportedly for schools and sports clubs in the run-up to the 2015 presidential election.

Perhaps, the severity of the offences, committed by Aluthgamage, Fernando and Ranjith, pales into insignificance in comparison to that of the coal procurement scam, which is believed to have caused staggering losses amounting to Rs. 10 billion to the state coffers. We reported on Monday that the use of diesel to keep the oil-fired power plants running to compensate for the Norochcholai generation loss due to the use of substandard coal had cost Rs. 4.5 billion in April 2026 alone. As we reported on Monday (08), according to power sector data, coal-based electricity generation in April 2026 was 27 GWh lower than in April 2025, a development that has sparked concerns among energy experts and economists over the mounting financial burden of diesel replacement on the country’s already strained power sector.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has sought to obfuscate the issue of substandard coal imports by appointing a presidential commission of inquiry to probe all coal purchases since 2009. His modus operandi is like “using a loincloth to control dysentery”, as a popular local saying goes. There’ll be hell to pay when the JVP/NPP politicians responsible for the coal scam and other rackets lose power. It will then be their turn to be hauled up before courts and bussed to prison so that they will be in the exalted company of Aluthgamage, Fernado, Ranjith and others.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.