An adventure at Vadamarachi and warm relations with Gamini Dissanayake

In May 1987 an attack by the armed forces on the LTTE stronghold of Vadamarachi in Jaffna took place under the leadership of two of Sri Lanka’s best generals, General Denzil Kobbekaduwe and General Vijaya Wimalaratne. The overall Commander of the operation was the able General Cyril Ranatunge who was at the time Commander, Joint Operations Command, who personally coordinated operations. The operation was a great success and substantial areas under the LTTE including the island’s northernmost city of Point Pedro came under army control.

After the stabilization of the ground situation there, the government decided to send in a team of senior Secretaries in order to restore civilian administration and address the needs of the people. I was among those who were flown by air force planes to Palaly and then by helicopters to Point Pedro, where we were due to meet with a representative group of citizens including presidents of cooperative societies, former heads of local authorities, school principals and others. We were sent in early in the morning with instructions to start the meeting. Several Ministers, including Mr. Lalith Athulathmudali and Mr. Gamani Jayasuriya were to fly in later in the morning in order to participate.

When we arrived in Point Pedro, we saw the scars of battle on trees and buildings. Part of the school where the meeting was held, Hartley College, was also damaged. Some soldiers were bathing in the sea. Perhaps because the most critical issue was the stabilization of the food situation, I was appointed by my fellow Secretaries to chair the meeting. With their assistance we succeeded in making rapid progress and by the time the Ministers came there was nothing for them to decide. We merely briefed them, and they had a general dialogue with those assembled.

After this was over General Ranatunge invited some of us for a drive in his Land Rover. Those invited included Ministers Athulathmudali and Jayasuriya, the Chief of Staff of the Navy and myself. The General himself took the wheel. We saw more damaged buildings and installations with burn and bullet marks, broken up roads and other signs of a fierce battle. All the time escort vehicles were following the General’s Land Rover including a battle tank!

General Ranatunge wanting to show us something in particular, turned into a side road and was soon more than half way down it, when he suddenly braked, stopped his vehicle and said “I am sorry. I took the wrong turn. This road has not yet been cleared!” In other words, there was the distinct possibility that there could be land mines on this road! We just looked at each other ruefully. Strangely enough, I was not in the least frightened. Just resigned.

I had inculcated in myself a lifetime’s discipline in trying not to worry about matters over which I had no control. We also noticed now that our back up vehicles including the battle tank had not followed us into this lane. They obviously knew that the road was not cleared. They would have been wondering with some trepidation as to why the General took this road. General Ranatunge now said “I will reverse carefully keeping to the path we have already taken.”

He dared not turn the vehicle around which would have meant touching so far untraversed areas. He started to reverse very slowly. Everyone was tense. There was no conversation. The road now seemed to us to be miles long. At last we emerged onto the main road. Someone made a wry comment and there was a burst of relieved laughter. The General was very apologetic. We all knew him well. As for me I had known him from the time I was lecturing on current affairs in the Army, when I was Assistant Secretary, Prime Minister’s office in the early 1960’s. He was lecturing on “Tactics” on the same course. We banteringly thanked him for the special thrill he had arranged for us.

We were now on our way back. On the way, we were going to visit some schools where refugees were housed to look into their welfare before boarding helicopters back to Palaly. The road was deserted. Suddenly we spotted a man in a traditional white verti riding a bicycle. Mr. Athulathmudali who was at the time diligently studying Tamil said “Stop, stop” to the General, got out and faced a quite startled citizen who had hastily got off his bicycle. He wanted to have a dialogue with him in Tamil. After responding briefly to the Minister’s halting and perhaps incorrect Tamil, his interlocutor opened up in flawless Sinhala much to our amusement. Thus ended Mr. Athulathmudali’s preliminary attempt to practice his Tamil in Point Pedro.

We spent some time at the refugee camps taking decisions pertaining to the welfare of the people, and flew in thereafter to Palaly for a late lunch. There we met Generals Kobbekaduwe and Wimalaratne both of whom I knew quite well and viewed the large arsenal captured from the LTTE and laid out on the ground for us to see. It was quite an impressive haul. Further plans to capture other areas had to be aborted due mainly to Indian interference and the infamous “food drop” labelled more cynically as the “Parippu drop.”

All of us got back in the late evening to relieved households who were in the first instance unhappy about our going. Relief was deepened when we related our little adventure of the morning. If destiny had otherwise decided that day, there wouldn’t have been very much left of us.

My memoirs of my career in the public service would not be complete without a reference to my relations with senior Minister Hon. Gamini Dissanayake. The most interesting feature of this relationship was that we never worked together. We dealt with each other officially a few times on the phone when I was Secretary to the Prime Minister. In keeping with my strongly held values, I dealt with whatever matter he brought up fairly and impartially, as indeed I dealt with everyone else. At this time I would probably have met him briefly somewhere or other no more than once.

Yet, when the government changed, and I was sent off to the SLBC, he made a special visit just to see me and to inquire whether I was comfortable. A couple of months later he telephoned me at home and invited me to be his Secretary, in the new Ministry of Mahaweli Development. But I was appointed Secretary, Ministry of Food and Co-operatives instead. In the meantime his son Naveen came from another school and joined my son Navin in one of the Primary classes at Royal College, and they became friends.

One day, I had taken Navin to see a day’s play in a cricket test match with India played at the SSC grounds. Mr. Dissanayake was at the time, Chairman of the Board of Control for Cricket. There wasn’t much of a crowd, and we were seated in one of the rows fairly far down in the section where the Board President’s special box was situated. We were seated, and watching the match, after lunch, when my son, nudged me and said “Mr. Gamini Dissanayake is coming down.” When I looked, I saw Mr. Dissanayake dressed in his Immaculately white national dress, coming down the steps towards us. I did not imagine that lie was coming to speak to us. What I thought was that he had spotted a friend of his and was going to talk to him. But he came straight to where we were, and sat in the vacant seat next to my son.

“I saw you seated here,” he said. Then, after a brief conversation he said “What are you doing there by yourselves? Come and join me in the box.” I thanked him and tried to dissuade him saying that we were quite comfortable where we were. But he was not to be denied, and for the rest of the match, until the close of play we sat with him and another guest of his, Mr. Juan Antonio Samaranch, President of the International Olympic Federation in the President’s box. We were treated to an excellent tea, and above all, great personal kindness.

My only residual thought was, that had I known this, I would have dressed myself in a better shirt! Thereafter, I still did not have any occasion to meet him. The earlier meeting was purely by accident. One morning, Mr. Dissanayake phoned me at home. He said, “Dharmasiri, I may need your assistance in the Cricket Board. I need a sound administrator to handle one or two things. It is not urgent at the moment. But I thought I should keep you informed that I may need you.” I had quite enough on my plate, including serving on numerous Committees and Boards, and told him so.

I emphasized that as it is, I had quite a long day and many responsibilities, and doubted whether I had the time for anything more. To this, he said something most interesting, which I have with success quoted later to others, when I needed their assistance. “Dharmasiri,” he said. “I know that you are extremely busy, and that you have many responsibilities. That is why I am speaking to you. Whenever I require assistance, I never speak to people who are not busy. They are useless. I only ask people who are busy.” No further debate was possible. In the end, happily, from my point of view, my services were not required.

This was not all. There was the occasion of the centenary dinner of the well known ship chandling firm, Nagoor Meera & Sons. Normally, I don’t accept invitations from companies who do business with us. This is the difference in approach between the private sector and the public sector. The private sector regards these occasions as important ones, where you renew existing contacts, make new contacts and generally promote business. The public sector on the other hand have not only to conduct business impartially and transparently, but must be manifestly seen to do so.

Hobnobbing with Principals or Agents was not the way to proceed. This invitation, however, I accepted for two reasons. In the first instance, these were after all, centenary celebrations and I felt that an exception needed to be made. Secondly Mr. Hussein Mohamed, then, Deputy Mayor of the Colombo Municipality, whose family firm this was, came personally to see me with the invitation to the Food Ministry and appealed to me that I should attend. It would have been churlish to refuse.

The dinner arrangements were such that there was a long head table at which President Jayewardene, Senior Ministers and other distinguished persons were to sit. Then there were a number of round tables for the other guests. We were standing around and talking before dinner when through a break in the crowd Mr. Dissanayake spotted me and walked straight up to me. “Dharmasiri, we have not met for a long time,” he said. We were conversing when the dinner gong was sounded.

Mr. Dissanayake asked me “where are you seated?” I said, “At one of the round tables. But you will be at the head table, better go.” He said “No, I want to carry on with our conversation. I will sit with you.” I said, “For heaven’s sake, go to the head table. It will be very awkward if you sit elsewhere. You’ ll create a scene.” But he was adamant. All invitations and persuasions to go to the head table were politely declined. He said he wanted to talk to me. We did have an interesting and extended conversation on many matters that evening.

I shall conclude by recording one other episode. This was where both of us were returning to Colombo from London and found ourselves in a nearly deserted first class cabin of Air Lanka. Our seats were on two opposite sides, and we waved to each other. It was my intention to go across and speak to him once the flight took off. But to my embarrassment, he walked across to where I was seated, before take off. In the course of the conversation lie said, “Once we take off, let’s get to the middle seats and have a long chat.”, That’s what happened.

It turned out to be a five hour conversation. Mr. Dissanayake was returning from Cambridge University which he was visiting from time to time in connection with his Master’s thesis. We discussed his thesis; Cambridge; University systems; Buddhism. Philosophy; Economics; Politics; Literature; Shakespeare; Concepts of Cabinet and Presidential systems of government; Cricket; Culture and personal values. He was widely read. I discovered that he used to read daily into the wee hours of the morning. It was a treat to converse with him.

Both our memories sharpened under the stimulus, and quotations from numerous sources came readily to our tongues. In the end it was exhilarating as well as exhausting. We sat and had lunch together, all the while continuing with our conversation. There was not much concentration on the food. He was intelligent, articulate, clear thinking and possessed a vision for Sri Lanka of progress and modernization.

It was a very frank conversation with a minimum of narrative and an abundance of appraisal and critical comment. Towards the end of this conversation, he suddenly said, “Dharmasiri, why don’t you come into politics? The country needs people like you in politics.” I said, “No, I wouldn’t like to enter politics.” “But why?” he inquired. “If people of quality don’t enter, how does the country progress?”

I could see that he intended to seriously follow this topic further. I therefore said, “Please don’t misunderstand me. I have a fundamental problem with politics. Politics is about power. It is about ego. It is highly disruptive of personal values. I feel it is exceedingly difficult to handle power. Once you are in it, quite unnoticed by you, you begin entering the insidious paths of compromising values further and further in order to acquire, retain and enhance power and influence. Then you begin to rationalize away, initially dubious, and then manifestly wrong acts and deeds. I am not blaming anybody. But I feel that this is the nature of politics, and I know that I would feel happier in mind, if I kept out of it.”

Mr. Dissanayake said that he did not agree. “There’s no reason why you can’t keep your values, whilst doing politics,” he said. “It’s nobody’s fault, and somebody has to do it, but I feel that handling power is inherently destabilizing of character and values,” I said. This part of the debate ended on this note of our agreeing to disagree. I was privileged to have this conversation. It was to me one of the stranger and more mysterious things of life, that a Senior Minister, with whom I had never worked, or even met socially, other than by accident should build such a rapport with me and show me such consideration and even affection.

As a Buddhist who believe in Karma, the only explanation I can think of was that he and I must have been close relations in previous births. It was therefore with a heavy heart and great pain of mind that I eventually went to his home some years later to pay my last respects to someone although distant, was at the same time close to me, and who was so brutally assassinated at a political rally, thereby cutting short a life of great promise.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobigraphy of MDD Pieris) ✍️

Scrabble champ’s father describes the making of an icon in the game

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.