Havelock City Mall celebrates two years with ‘Tenant Partner Excellence Awards’

Havelock City Mall recently celebrated its 2nd Anniversary with the theme, “Two Years of Smiles, Happiness, and Shared Joy.”

The milestone event recognises two years of creating a vibrant community hub for shopping, dining, and entertainment while also honouring the partners who have made this journey remarkable.

Over the past two years, Havelock City Mall has set new benchmarks in Sri Lanka’s retail landscape. From introducing leading international and local brands to curating experiences that bring people together, the mall has redefined what a modern lifestyle destination can be living up to its brand promise, “My Happy Place.”

As part of the celebrations, the mall hosted the Havelock City Mall ‘Tenant Partner Excellence Awards 2025’ on 18 October, a morning dedicated to recognising excellence among its 135 tenant partners. The awards celebrated achievements across 19 categories, including Sales Performance, Customer Service etc.

The event brought together management of the tenants, the Havelock City Mall management team, and senior executives of Overseas Realty (Ceylon) PLC, highlighting the spirit of partnership that continues to drive HCM’s success.

Overseas Realty (Ceylon) PLC Chief Executive Officer Pravir Samarasinghe, said: “As we celebrate this milestone, I extend my heartfelt gratitude to our shoppers, retail partners, and other vendors for their continuous, unwavering trust and support. I also take this opportunity to congratulate all our deserving winners who have exemplified excellence and partnership throughout this journey. Together, we have made Havelock City Mall Colombo’s most cherished and joyful destination, my happy place.”

To mark the 2nd anniversary, Havelock City Mall hosted a two-day celebration on 18 and 19 October, featuring exclusive discounts of up to 30%, hourly lucky draws and select 200 winners, an international food fiesta, and live entertainment acts that will transform the mall into a festival of joy. Adding to the excitement, HCM is introducing an exclusive loyalty card for Havelock City Apartment residents, offering a host of special privileges and benefits.