Ravi Karunanayake released on bail in NLB corruption case

Former Finance Minister and New Democratic Front (NDF) MP Ravi Karunanayake, who was arrested by the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC) over allegations that three employees recruited for a special project of the National Lotteries Board (NLB) were deployed for his political activities, causing a loss to the Government, was yesterday ordered to be released on bail by Colombo Additional Magistrate Liyan Warushavithana.

The Magistrate ordered the suspect to be released on two sureties of Rs. 1 million each and also imposed a travel ban on him.

Karunanayake was arrested when he appeared before CIABOC to provide a statement in connection with the investigation.

CIABOC told court that the case concerned three employees recruited on contract during Karunanayake’s tenure as Finance Minister from 12 January 2015 to 22 May 2017.

Investigators alleged that Karunanayake, together with then NLB Chairman Shyamala Perera, recruited two Coordinating Officers and a Management Assistant using NLB funds, purportedly for a special project of the Finance Ministry.

CIABOC alleged that the three employees performed no services for the NLB but were paid salaries and allowances by the institution, resulting in a financial loss. It alleged that they had instead been deployed for Karunanayake’s political activities.

The Commission sought his remand, alleging that he had acted together with the first suspect to influence witnesses.

CIABOC also told court that Karunanayake had been directed on four occasions to appear before the Commission but had failed to do so. Officers subsequently visited his residence on 29 August to conduct an inquiry.

According to CIABOC, officers were informed that Karunanayake had travelled to Nuwara Eliya for his daughter’s wedding, but subsequent investigations indicated that he was in Hambantota.

Charges have been filed against Karunanayake for the alleged offence of corruption under Section 70 of the Bribery Act, as amended by Act No. 20 of 1994.

Appearing for Karunanayake, Senior Counsel Asoka Weerasooriya sought bail on medical grounds and told court that his client had five stents and could require three more, citing medical reports from an examination in Singapore on 26 August. He also cited sleep apnoea, cellulitis and diabetes.

Counsel also submitted that the first suspect had already been granted bail and that there was no reason for Karunanayake to evade court proceedings.

After considering the submissions, the Additional Magistrate ordered Karunanayake’s release on bail.