Book Rview: ODYSSEY OF WAR

Doctor Nadesan is a remarkable gentleman. As a Sri Lanka expatriate in Australia he practiced as a veterinary surgeon for many years. That was his profession. But quite obviously writing is his passion. He began by editing and publishing a monthly bilingual tabloid newspaper in Melbourne, and this at a time when there were few such publications linking Sri Lanka Expatriates across the vast spaces of Australia. But his literary aspirations were more ambitious; they were creative.

Nadesan wanted to create stories, tell stories, draw on life and events around him, both in Australia and Sri Lanka; to weave plots and narratives and through novels bring to life people, probe their loves and hates, their desires and aversions. He wanted sculpture-like, to tease out the minute but no less real feelings, desires and motives of his characters. To set them on a literary stage where they could tell the story which only he could perceive and reproduce.

Over two decades he has written and published Butterfly Lake (2007) Lost in You (2013) Veterinary Vignettes and King Asoka’s Veterinary Hospital (2020). Though a novel, King Asoka was faintly autobiographical. Odyssey on the other hand is a work of fiction interwoven into Sri Lanka’s quarter century long civil war.

He explains that “those who have written about the War so far are those who took part in the War. Since I have never experienced war directly, the characters I have created are fictional. The novel follows them wherever they go. This is not a war novel. This is just the story of the victims of the Eelam War.”

At the centre of this story is a romance, that of the protagonist Asokan. He is a loner, an orphan, a cynic. Life has dealt Asokan a bad hand of cards. As a youth he was in the thick of the exodus from the Jaffna Peninsula into the Vanni in 1995. It marked him, it scarred him, and the aftermath left him alone, bereft of even the few who cared about him, regarded him as family and gave his life meaning and purpose. Though he was able to leave Sri Lanka, settle in Australia and establish some kind of life, stability and security in Melbourne, he remained emotionally scarred.

Years later he meets Jenny while travelling across the Thar Desert of in India. “She was tall, with shades of Turkish or Iranian features. She had raised her black hair high, clipped it on her head. Her underlined eyes occupied a large part of her face. Her red lips were open like a bud blooming at midnight. She wore a Punjabi Salwar and had wrapped the Dupatta around her head, covering her neck. Her waist was narrow, broadening out like a professional dancer.”

So begins the story of the romance between Asokan and Jenny which unfolds right across pages of the novel; forming the backdrop for a thriller that covers war, intrigue, espionage, love, betrayal and pathos.

The plot is complex, linking combatants of the Sri Lanka Military and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, operatives of Indian and Australian intelligence, love, loyalty and intrigue across two continents. The odyssey of war!

Prima Group Sri Lanka supports National Flood Relief Efforts with over Rs. 300 Million in dry rations

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.