Dearo Venture Capital strengthens leadership, unveils strategic vision for SL’s economic growth

Dearo Venture Capital Ltd, Sri Lanka’s largest venture capital institution, officially announced the appointment of its new Director Board at a special media conference held on 10 September.

The event brought together members of the media, business leaders, investors, stakeholders, and members of the Dearo management team to witness the unveiling of the company’s renewed strategic direction and long-term vision for supporting entrepreneurship and economic development in Sri Lanka.

The newly appointed Board of Directors comprises professionals with extensive experience in finance, banking, governance, technology, risk management, human resources, and corporate leadership. Under the leadership of Chairman and Independent/Non-Executive Director,  K.M.M. Jabir, the Board consists of Neil Bogahalanda, Lalith Fernando, Muditha Welihinda and Shaheena Mohammed as Independent/Non-Executive Director. The Board also includes  Prasanna Ranasinghe the Non-Independent Executive Director, who leads the team at Dearo Ventures Capital.

“Over the past four years, Dearo Venture Capital Ltd has emerged as a significant force within Sri Lanka’s investment and financial services sector.Today, we serve more than 25,000 customers through a network of 25 branches island wide, supported by a dedicated workforce of over 350 professionals. Dearo Venture Capital Ltd has successfully built an asset base exceeding Rs.5 billion, reflecting the confidence and trust placed in the institution by investors and stakeholders across the country,” noted Prasanna Ranasinghe.

The new Board is expected to provide strategic leadership and governance as Dearo Venture Capital Ltd expands its role as a catalyst for entrepreneurship, innovation, and sustainable economic development throughout Sri Lanka.

“Unlike traditional investment models, Dearo directs resources toward productive sectors that contribute directly to national development, including tourism, agriculture, fisheries, manufacturing, trading, education, engineering and service industries.

Through strategic investments and partnerships, Dearo supports Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises, helping entrepreneurs access growth capital, expand operations, create employment opportunities, and strengthen local economies. With the newly appointed dynamic and experienced Board of Directors, Dearo Venture Capital intends to strengthen Sri Lanka’s economy in a more feasible way,” emphasized K.M.M. Jabir.

The company focuses on connecting investment capital with entrepreneurial potential, creating opportunities for business growth while generating sustainable wealth for investors.Dearo Venture Capital Ltd has further strengthened its commitment to sector-based development through its specialised subsidiaries: Dearo Agri, Dearo Education, Dearo Engineering, Dearo IT and Dearo Investment.