Sri Lanka committed to upholding international standards in nuclear safety, security: Minister

Colombo, July 13 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lanka is firmly committed to upholding international standards in nuclear safety and security, Minister of Science and Technology, Prof. Chrishantha Abeysena said today.

The Minister made these remarks while attending as the Chief Guest at the "Regional Training Course on Basic Introduction to Nuclear Forensics," organised by the Sri Lanka Atomic Energy Regulatory Council (SLAERC) in collaboration with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

"In today’s world, where the risk of unauthorised and malicious use of nuclear and radioactive materials remains a global concern, the field of nuclear forensics is critical. This scientific and technical knowledge is essential for investigating incidents, identifying sources of material and supporting law enforcement agencies. Such training programmes further strengthen the preparedness of regional countries to respond to criminal or intentional acts involving nuclear materials," he said.

The Minister emphasised that Sri Lanka remains firmly committed to upholding international standards in nuclear safety and security, noting that strong regulatory frameworks and technical competence are fundamental to national security.

The event commenced today in Colombo, as a result of discussions on the implementation of the Integrated Nuclear Security Sustainability Plan (INSSP) and will continue till July 17.

The programme reflects Sri Lanka’s continuous commitment to strengthening national and regional capabilities to address potential threats related to radioactive materials and to ensure robust nuclear security.

The primary objective of this training is to raise awareness among participants regarding the role of nuclear forensics within a national response framework, in order to successfully address criminal or intentional unauthorised acts involving nuclear or other radioactive materials, associated facilities or related activities.