Srima Dissanayake runs for president and I get sidelined in the UNP

With the death of its presidential candidate only a few weeks away from the election the UNP’s internal fissures came to the surface. The logical substitute to take over was Ranil but Gamini’s family and some of his supporters were keen to field Srima Dissanayake hoping to garner a sympathy vote. I was skeptical of this move and also emotionally drained by the rapid change of events. So I kept away and spent a few days privately mourning at home and attending to my duties as a newly elected MP But Wickreme Weerasooria (Gamini D’s brother-in-law) came home and made a personal plea to rejoin the campaign as they were short of members for the inner circle.

It was not a request that I could refuse though I had been disillusioned by the family coterie that had alienated me from Gamini during the parliamentary election. With his death I felt that my links to the Dissanayakes had loosened, if not snapped. It soon became clear to me that Srima’s entry was a mistake. She, more than any other person, was disoriented by her husband’s death and was in no condition to fight a major electoral battle. The real beneficiary of her entry was Ranil, who did not have to fight a losing battle with CBK.

On Hameed’s advice he bargained with the Dissanayakes that he would stand down on the understanding that in the event of Srima losing, he would be given the leadership without a contest. He was not giving away anything because the UNP constitution stipulated that if its candidate, in this case Srima, became the President she would automatically become the leader of the UNP. With the success of this strategy Hameed became the “eminence grise” of the party and was later made the Chairman of the UNP by a jubilant Ranil.

The Presidential election was held on November 9, 1994 and CBK won easily with 62.2 percentage of the vote. The results were as follows:

After 17 years in the wilderness the PA with the SLFP as its core, was back in power. There was jubilation in the country and especially in the North and East where the populace began to wear Chandrika bangles and sarees to show their sympathy and wish to get back to normal life after nearly two decades of civil strife.

The new President also undertook a “Peace offensive” by sending a delegation of her friends to talk to the leaders of the fighting units. We had reservations regarding the composition of a group of amateurs as her negotiators, who had to refer everything back to the activist President in Colombo. There was no agreement forthcoming about the unit of devolution as well as the subjects to be devolved. The UNP party line was to object to the permanent joinder of the Northern and Eastern Provinces which appeared to be a basic demand of the Tamil negotiators.

In the meanwhile the Muslim Congress which under Ashraff became a crucial support group in the light of the narrow majority of the government party in Parliament, was promoting the idea of a non-contiguous Eastern Provincial Council dominated by the Muslims. To further complicate matters a group of SLFPers led by Ratnasiri Wickremanayake stood against a deal with the Tamils on both counts of unit and powers of the proposed Provincial Councils. Due to the pressure of another group of veteran SLFPers CBK had to give up the idea of appointing Ratnasiri as PM and settle for appointing her mother as a compromise Prime Minister. She had therefore to postpone the presenting of a new constitution as she had promised the voters, which she had delegated to GL Peiris her Justice Minister to draft as soon as she formed her Cabinet.

In the meanwhile Ranil had taken over the leadership of the UNP and was attempting to consolidate his hold on the party well aware that the majority of its members had voted against him in the leadership struggle. He depended on a small coterie of friends to run the party. The leader of this group was Gamini Athukorale who had fallen out with Gamini Dissanayake as I have described earlier. He was appointed the Party Secretary with full control of the Sirikotha administration. Their first step was to change the party constitution to give extra powers to the leader of the party. He became in effect the “Leader for life” of the UNP at its Kataragama convention in 1995. [Incidentally it were these provisions which prevented his ouster in later years leading to the formation of the SJB].

He then began to sideline those members who had stood in his way. The first to be tackled was Wijepala Mendis who was probably the most senior UNPer in Parliament having entered politics under Dudley Senanayake and winning every election from Katana electorate since then. It has been reported by journalist Uvindu Kurukulasuriya that the real reason for the vendetta was that Wijepala had voted for Gamini in the leadership contest. He was accused of corruption for having exchanged a block of land belonging to him for a government land after the land reforms.

This was a strange accusation since many UNPers, including JRJ, had exchanged their unproductive lands for properties under the Land Reform Commission. This attack devastated Wijepala who did not know how to respond. However he took out a full page advertisement clearly setting out his case. Then Ranil had to lay off because party members took Wijepala’s side. But it led to a simmering hostility which broke out to the surface later on.

I knew that Ranil was not well disposed towards me because he kept on refusing to give me time to speak in Parliament even though Anil Moonesinghe as Deputy Speaker, Bernard Soysa, Ratnasiri Wickremanayake and Dharmasiri Senanayake complimented me from the well of the house for my contributions. Outside Parliament I was struck off the speaker’s list even when the organizer of a meeting asked for me. For instance when Mahinda Samarasinghe listed me as a speaker at his Matugama meeting he was pulled up and my speaking slot was changed to a time when the audience was leaving the grounds.

When vacancies occurred in the Working Committee my name was overlooked even though many professionals in the party proposed my name. In fairness I must add that most of this could have been on the advice of Hameed who was made Chairman of the party on Ranil’s recommendation. Hameed was busy undercutting me in the Kandy district organization as well. Even though in the Opposition I began to organize weekend meetings of the party in the Kandy district which became very popular and attracted many of the lower middle class voters who were spread out in the small towns.

Since we held meetings in village temples I was able to interact with the Buddhist priests who had been the bulwark of the Kandy UNP during Gamini’s time. I splashed hand painted posters like the JVP, announcing our meetings in all the towns giving us a large following which was usually ignored by politicians after an election and activated only during election time. Because of my connections as former Chairman of Lake House and an MP, I had good relations with journalists who enthusiastically covered our meetings. All this worried Hameed and I was taken aback when Sirikotha issued a circular banning such meetings. It was a clear sign that the party preferred to lose votes rather than have its bureaucratic authority compromised. The new leadership was afraid of a challenge to its authority.

But it was not only a question of a witch hunt against Gamini loyalists. I was ideologically closer to a social democratic philosophy than the conservative right wing inclinations of the UNP leadership. I had admired the commitment of Dudley Senanayake to ensure food security for the poor through his “Green Revolution.” During the regime of Mrs. B it became clear that the “socialist” policies of her leftist partners were leading to loss of production and consequent shortages and the emergence

of rationing and a queue system for the basic essentials of life. By 1977 the Government of Mrs. B was on the ropes.

The leftists quit her Government alleging that her SLFP was dominated by “Mudalalis”. The UNP under JRJ with Ronnie de Mel as Finance Minister, enlarged the safety net and opened up more opportunities for upward mobility and employment for the lower strata of our society. The result was the emergence of a new middle class which tended to be consumer oriented. Premadasa had introduced pro-poor policies and started the Janasaviya project. CBK who had come to power on a leftist manifesto inherited these reforms and began moving to a centrist position in her economic policies which was welcomed by me.

At the same time she made a determined effort to solve the ethnic problem by negotiating with the LTTE and other Tamil political formations. The ceasefire was welcomed by the people of Jaffna so much so that the LTTE began to worry about the prospects of a peace deal and began to look for excuses to resume fighting. For the first time the Government took the initiative to make the case for a fair and just settlement of the ethnic issue, to the Sinhala people through the “Sudu Nelum” movement.

It can be disclosed now that her government worked closely with the representatives of international monetary agencies like the IMF and the World Bank located in Colombo. Nadeem Haq of the IMF and Peter Harrold of the World Bank had a strong influence on CBK as Finance Minister. At one stage it looked as if the IMF and The World Bank were running the Finance Ministry. Well regarded professionals like AS Jayawardene, Tara de Mel and Rajan Asirwatham were CBK’s close advisors. When Tara attempted to shake up the lethargic Education Ministry the JVP called it the “Tara-Peter- Harrold reforms” thereby creating a monster out of the peace loving Peter who unlocked World Bank funding for the Education Ministry.

CBK undertook economic reforms that even JRJ and Ronnie were afraid to undertake during their tenure. This was best seen in her innovative approach to State Owned Enterprises [SOEs] which were the bane of the local economy. Of the series of Public sector-Private sector reforms [PPPs] undertaken during her time the best example was the privatisation of the Telecom sector under the able management of her confidante Minister Mangala Samaraweera. While the state retained a major share of the enterprise a large parcel of shares were bought by a world class Japanese Telecommunications company [NTT] which managed the enterprise.

Workers were given free shares which they immediately encashed by selling to the Japanese company. The Telecommunications sector which was inefficient and loss making was turned around into a profitable and efficient enterprise. Similar arrangements were made for Sri Lankan Airlines [With Emirates] and the Port [With P and O]. The Queen Elizabeth Quay [QEQ] in Colombo harbour which was entrusted to John Keells group and their partner P and O for management is today more productive than the state owned Port Authority. Discussions were started for the reorganization of the Ceylon Electricity Board with support from the ADB. The President also attempted to bring the country back to its non aligned stance which had paid dividends during the time of her mother. With Lakshman Kadirgamar as Minister, the External Affairs Ministry, which had been sidelined earlier, began to make a positive contribution.

It was my view that we should take a sympathetic view of these developments and not opportunistically oppose the government particularly when CBK reached out to the Opposition to jointly address pressing economic and ethnic issues.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.