CBSL adopts cautious stance in the face of economic uncertainties

The Central Bank is keeping its overnight policy rates unchanged, adopting a cautious stance amid uncertainty over the inflationary impact of energy prices due to the Middle East crisis.

‘We maintained the overnight policy rate at 7.75 percent, considering low inflation and a restrained approach on the fallout of the US-Israeli war on Iran, Central Bank Governor Dr Nandalal Weerasinghe said.

The Governor made these remarks yesterday at a press briefing held at the Central Bank head office in Colombo to announce the monthly monetary policy stance.

Dr Weerasinghe added: ‘Inflation is now expected to reach the Central Bank’s target of 5 percent in the second quarter of 2026, after Sri Lanka raised fuel prices by about 35 percent this month.

‘However, spillovers from the ongoing conflict could weigh on domestic economic activity in the period ahead should the conflict be prolonged.

‘The rates were steady since last May as the nation recovers from a 2022 financial crisis driven by a severe dollar shortage.

‘Supported by a US$ 2.9 billion programme with the IMF, Sri Lanka posted a strong economic recovery last year, growing by 5 percent and now targeting growth between 4 percent and 5 per cent in 2026.

‘What stands out is that they see space for inflation to rise because of energy prices but still stay contained.

‘From now to June, underlying economic momentum has the space to keep pace despite the disruption because domestic liquidity and credit has been quite substantial as well.

‘An IMF team will arrive in Colombo on Friday for the combined fifth and sixth reviews of the bailout.

‘Furthermore, Gross Official Reserves increased to US$ 7.3 billion at end February 2026 and the Central Bank purchased a substantial amount of foreign exchange from the market in the first two months of the year.

‘However, the ongoing conflict in the Middle East poses risks to Sri Lanka’s external sector outlook, particularly through energy, tourism, trade and remittance flows, although the overall magnitude of the impact remains uncertain.

‘While the Sri Lanka rupee remained relatively stable in early 2026, some depreciation pressures were observed following the onset of the Middle East conflict, similar to the exchange rates of regional peers.

‘Meanwhile, the Monetary Policy Board remains prepared to implement appropriate policy measures to ensure that inflation stabilizes around the target, while supporting the economy to reach its potential.’

Cargills adopts Crow Island Beach in partnership with Clean Ocean Force Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.