Rotary Club of Colombo issues call to transform lives

Championing the theme ‘Creating a Lasting Impact,' new President Rtn. Azad Mansoor extends open invitation to corporates in Sri Lanka, overseas partners and individuals

On 3 July 2026, the Rotary Club of Colombo will ceremonially install Rtn. Azad Mansoor as its 98th President at Cinnamon Life

As Sri Lanka continues to navigate economic and social challenges, the importance of collective responsibility, sustainable partnerships, and community-driven action has never been more critical. At a time when communities require not only support but long-term empowerment, the Rotary Club of Colombo stands as one of the country’s most respected humanitarian organisations — transforming lives through service, compassion, and action for nearly a century. The Club also holds a distinguished position in Rotary history as the only Rotary Club in Sri Lanka to have produced an International Rotary President — a reflection of its leadership legacy and global recognition. As the Club approaches its historic 100-year milestone, the 2026/2027 Rotary year marks a defining new chapter under the leadership of its 98th President, Rtn. Azad Mansoor.

The Rotary Club of Colombo has set “Creating a Lasting Impact” the theme for 2026/2027 which reflects a clear and ambitious vision: To create meaningful, measurable, and sustainable change that uplifts communities today and transforms generations tomorrow.

Under the leadership of President Rtn. Azad Mansoor, the focus is on expanding humanitarian impact through strategic partnerships, corporate collaboration, and meaningful sponsorship support.

The core goal is to create projects that not only serve today’s needs, but continue transforming lives for years to come.

On 3 July 2026, the Rotary Club of Colombo will ceremonially install Rtn, Azad Mansoor as its 98th President at Cinnamon Life — marking another milestone in its nearly 100-year journey.

This event represents more than a leadership transition. It reflects a renewed commitment to scaling impact, strengthening partnerships, and delivering sustainable change across Sri Lanka.

Rotary Club of Colombo is also marking nearly a century of service across Sri Lanka.

Over 120,000 women screened through cancer awareness and detection programs

Flagship Rotary District Initiative 2026/2027 “Sharp Eyes – Learn Better”

A signature national Rotary District Initiative will be one of the key visions of President Rtn. Azad Mansoor. This program focuses on unlocking educational potential through vision care.

Mansoor said many children struggle academically simply due to undetected vision challenges. This initiative seeks to remove that barrier — enabling better learning, stronger confidence, and improved life outcomes.

Mansoor is extending an invitation to corporate Sri Lanka, overseas partners and individuals. He said sustainable and meaningful social impact can only be achieved through strong partnerships between humanitarian organisations and the corporate and professional sectors.

Socially conscious individuals join hands in creating meaningful and measurable change across Sri Lanka.

“Most importantly every contribution becomes an investment in the future of Sri Lanka and its people,” he said.

“As Sri Lanka rebuilds and moves toward a stronger future, the responsibility of transformation belongs to all of us. “Real transformation happens when communities, corporates, and individuals unite with a shared purpose.” The Rotary Club of Colombo invites all partners to join this journey of service, hope, and impact. Together, let us create a lasting impact for generations to come,” Mansoor added.

and collaborations email: [email protected]/[email protected] OR through the official website of the Rotary Club of Colombo.