Home Lands completes 60% piling work of ‘Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo’

Home Lands has announced that Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo has reached a significant construction milestone, with 60 percent of its piling work now officially completed, just under three months after the project’s launch, placing its rate of progress 10 percent ahead of plan.

With construction progressing ahead of target, the development’s piling programme is advancing strongly, reinforcing Home Lands’ commitment to timely delivery and its ability to execute large-scale developments through sound planning, financial strength, and a fully integrated business model.

A total of 192 piles are being constructed as part of the development, with 9 piling machines mobilised and three major contractors: Access Engineering PLC, Sanken Construction’s SanPiling (Pvt) Ltd., and D P Jayasinghe Piling Company (Pvt) Ltd., currently engaged in the works. Supported by the contractors’ extensive fleets and expertise in piling, the scale of operations reflects the pace and efficiency with which construction is progressing at the site.

Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo represents a landmark investment in Sri Lanka’s real estate sector, at Port City Colombo. The project investment of USD 150 million by Home Lands, withthe total project value estimated at over USD 300 million, is the larges treal estate investment by a single Sri Lankan developer, expected to attract large foreign currency inflows into Sri Lanka by way of global marketing efforts targeting a global clientele. Located in the prestigious Central Park District, the ultra-luxury twin-tower development introduces the branded global lifestyle concept to Sri Lanka and offers residents a premium living environment overlooking nearly 40 acres of Central Park and the Indian Ocean.

For investors, Home Lands’ track record provides further confidence in its ability to deliver. As Sri Lanka’s number one, most trusted, and most innovative real estate brand, Home Lands has been recognised as Best Developer – Sri Lanka at the PropertyGuru Asia Property Awards in 2021, 2024, and 2025, and became Sri Lanka’s only real estate Superbrand in 2025. With more than 5,000 residences sold, over 3,750 homes delivered with 400 more units ready to deliver within this year, and over 2,850 units currently under construction, Home Lands brings more than two decades of experience, scale, financial strength, and proven delivery capability to Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo.

“Construction progress of Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo is well underway, with 60 percent of the piling work completed already,” said Nalin Herath, Chairman of Home Lands Group of Companies. “Our vision to bring a truly world class lifestyle development to Port City Colombo takes shape with the steady construction progress of Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo.”

Home Lands has also reinforced its long-term confidence in Port City Colombo through the acquisition of its second land parcel within the Central Park District, shortly after securing its first.The second land parcel acquired, spanning over 3 acres in extent, is similar in size and located adjacent to the land on which Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo is being constructed.

The acquisition further demonstrates the company’s financial strength and continued commitment to investing in Sri Lanka’s future driven by the potential of Port City Colombo.

With piling for Central Park Boulevard now 60% complete and construction progressing ahead of target, Home Lands once again reinforces its commitment to delivering landmark developments on schedule while creating lasting value for homeowners and investors, further strengthening its position as the developer of choice for those seeking the best in lifestyle choices and high returns.