Glimpses of an Ancient Civilisation Society and Culture in Jaffna

The evening of 11th April 2026, marked the launch of Professor Sivasubramanium Pathmanathan’s groundbreaking research, Glimpses of an Ancient Civilization, Society and Culture in Jaffna 300 BC–AD 500. Distinguished academics, legal luminaries, and members of civil society gathered at the Cinnamon Grand Hotel for an evening of celebration of the seminal new book.

The event was graced by President’s Counsel Mr Kanag-Isvaran, who served as the Chief Guest and Dr J.M. Swaminathan, Dr B.A Hussainmiya and Dr Jehan Perera who participated as the distinguished speakers.

Professor Pathmanathan’s book embarks on a rigorous and illuminating journey through more than eight centuries of early history in the Jaffna peninsula- the Nagas of the prehistoric period. He brings to light the social, cultural, and civilizational contours of a society that flourished long before the written record, mainly carved into metal and stone in Tamil Brahmi Scripture. Drawing on paleographical evidence, epigraphic sources, and comparative historical analysis, the work fills a significant lacuna in the historiography of Sri Lanka, offering scholars and general readers alike a compelling window into a largely uncharted era- the image of a society that developed an economy and culture peculiar to the areas of Jaffna District.

Mr Jitto Arulampalam a long-term friend and collaborator of the professor, opened the event acknowledging his landmark contribution in writing a new chapter in the history of Sri Lanka and also announced the establishment of an endowment to the University of Jaffna to award “The Professor Sivasubramanium Pathmanathan Gold Medal for the best overall student performance in History”.

Chief Guest Mr Kanag-Isvaran P.C lauded Professor Pathmanathan’s dedication to meticulous research, describing the publication as a testament to the power of scholarship in bridging communities through a shared understanding of history.

“History, then, is not only about the past; it is a guide for the choices we must make today about inclusion, justice and the kind of nation we wish to pass on to our children.”

Dr Jehan Perera reflected on the rare quality of scholarship that Professor Pathmanathan embodies, speaking to both its intellectual rigour and its broader significance:

“There are scholars who give us knowledge. There are others who give us perspective. But there are not many who, through their painstaking scholarship and generosity of their spirit, help a country see itself anew. Professor Pathmanathan belongs to that rare category.”

Dr B.A Hussainmiya also addressed the gathering, offering his scholarly perspective on the book’s significance to the broader historiography of Sri Lanka.

“Professor Pathmanathan exercises exemplary philological restraint, deriving conclusions strictly from what the text can securely sustain. This methodological discipline has significant implications: it opens the possibility of an emergent Tamil polity in the northern region rather than presupposing unqualified subordination to the Anuradhapura kingdom, thereby inviting a more nuanced understanding of early

The event also featured a dance offering depicting Nallor Murugan, choreographed by Kalasuri Vishwabhinandana Guru Thivya Sujen.

The highlight of the evening was to hear from the professor, his 50-year journey that has culminated in this magnum opus.

“The present volume is based on historical information that has accumulated over the past 100 years through excavations and exploratory surveys but hitherto not used or deciphered. The examination of these inscriptions on some monuments found in the Jaffna district has finally led to the discernment of the society and culture of the distant past.”

The event concluded with a felicitation by the University of Jaffna represented by Mrs Shanthini Arulanantham Head of the Department of History, recognizing his immense contributions to the history and education of the country through the different roles he has held.

Professor Pathnamathan being garlanded by his niece Mrs Kala Amirthalingam upon entrance

Distinguished speakers: Dr Swaminathan, Dr Jehan Perera and Mr Kanag-Isvaran

The chief guest Mr Kanag Isvaran lighting the traditional oil lamp

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.