Dry and Dull Skin …

Lots of my readers seem to be having a problem with dry and dull skin.

Yes, such problems can be a nuisance … annoying and uncomfortable, as well.

Well, this week I’m giving you some home remedies … for Dry and Dull Skin:

Those searching for graceful skin should rely upon the saturating properties of honey as it eliminates dullness by making the skin look delicate, radiant and full.

Use 01 tablespoon of honey, with half a bowl of yoghurt, as an organic face pack, and leave it on the skin to dry and, after 15-20 minutes, wash it off with lukewarm water.

Aloe vera hydrates the skin and getting aloe vera gel straight from the plant is exceptionally useful in disposing of the dull skin.

Apply aloe vera gel and wait 15-20 minutes for it to dry up and then rinse normally with lukewarm water.

Blend half a cucumber and mix it with your favourite face mask and leave it to dry. Once done, remove it with water and experience the rejuvenation from the cucumbers.

Banana is a good source of potassium, which helps to reduce inflammation and heal the skin. Banana also contains vitamin C, which is an antioxidant that helps to protect the skin from free radicals.

Mash a ripe banana and mix it with 01 tablespoon of honey and rub the paste to the dry skin affected area.

Avocado masks are well-known for their hydrating and nourishing properties in homemade skincare treatments.

You will need a ripe avocado, 01 tablespoon honey (optional, for extra moisture) and a few drops of lemon juice (optional, for brightness).

Scoop out the flesh of half an avocado and mash it in a bowl until it forms a smooth paste. Add honey for extra moisture and a few drops of lemon juice for a brightening effect, if desired, and thoroughly combine the ingredients.

Cleanse and pat dry your face before applying an even layer of the avocado mask.

Allow the mask to sit on your face for about 10-15 minutes and then remove the mask with lukewarm water and pat your skin dry gently.

Cyberbullying (silent predator): A modern menace and Sri Lanka’s struggle to overcome it

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.