Sri Lanka Institute of Information Technology raises the bar for academic excellence

The Sri Lanka Institute of Information Technology (SLIIT), the country’s leading provider of non-state higher education, successfully concluded its March 2026 Convocation. The event recognized over 800 graduates and postgraduates whose achievements represent the highest standards of scholarship, leadership, and community engagement.

The convocation took place over two days at the SLIIT Malabe Campus Main Auditorium. On 3-4 March, students, their families, faculty, and alumni gathered to recognize and applaud the hard work, talent, and perseverance of each graduate who walked across the stage to receive their certificate.

A new cohort of students leaves SLIIT with qualifications and specializations that are flexible, accessible, and relevant to a hyper competitive job market. The Vice Chancellor’s address called on these graduates to leave university knowing they are forward thinkers who can enact change in their own lives, professions, and in their communities.

Prof. Elizabeth Croft, Vice-President Academic and Provost, University of Victoria Canada (UVic) was the Chief Guest on day one, with Associate Vice President for Global Engagement at UVic, Dr. A. R. Elangovan, also in attendance. Dr. Christian Matthews, Assistant Faculty Pro-Vice Chancellor at Liverpool John Moores University made his Chief Guest address virtually.

Industry partners representing Bank of Ceylon, Dialog Axiata, Genetech, IFS R&D International, Scybers, Six Sigma Management Institute, Suchith Mohotti Associates, and Walkers CML also joined the distinguished gathering.

The 2026 convocation was yet another milestone in a remarkable journey begun over 25 years ago. Since 1999, SLIIT has provided rigorous and innovative training to a growing population of young people, who choose SLIIT for its impactful student experience.

SLIIT has become synonymous with academic excellence, ranked third overall among Sri Lankan universities in the 2026 Times Higher Education World University Rankings.

Sun Siyam Pasikudah celebrates Women’s Day with curated experiences and a continued commitment to women in hospitality

ADB pledges over $1 billion annually to Sri Lanka in post-cyclone recovery push

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.