KBSL appoints Asanga Herath CFO

KBSL Information Technologies has announced the appointment of Asanga Herath as Chief Financial Officer. This strategic addition to KBSL’s senior management team underscores the company’s commitment to operational excellence as it navigates an era of rapid digital transformation.

Herath brings a wealth of financial expertise and global qualifications, spanning over two decades of experience in accounting, management finance, and corporate governance. He is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (FCMA, CGMA), a Certified Management Accountant through the Institute of Certified Management Accountants, Australia, and a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management, UK (FCMI). Herath’s broad-based professional certifications also include Fellowships and Memberships with the Institute of Public Accountants (FIPA), the Chartered Institute for Securities & Investment (MCSI), and the Institute of Chartered Accountants.

Since beginning his professional journey in 2001, Herath has built a reputation for strategic insight, financial rigour, and a deep understanding of the frameworks necessary to drive corporate growth. His expertise spans financial planning, risk management, compliance, and governance critical capabilities for enterprises striving to scale efficiently while maintaining operational resilience.

KBSL CEO Vasee Nesiah said: “Asanga brings exceptional financial expertise and discipline and impressive entrepreneurial experience to KBSL. I expect Asanga will help define our strategic direction, support innovation and ensure operational excellence. With Asanga’s guidance, KBSL’s Senior Management team has the required support to help deliver exceptional outcomes to our customers and stakeholders alike.”

As CFO, Herath will work closely with the executive leadership team, optimising KBSL’s operations and ensuring alignment with the company’s broader mission of enabling clients to thrive in an increasingly digital world.