BBC in trouble again!

BBC is in trouble again; this time with the most powerful person in the world. Donald Trump has given an ultimatum to the BBC over a blunder it should have corrected and apologized for, a long time ago, which it did not do for reasons best known, perhaps, only to the hierarchy of the BBC. Many wonder whether it is due to sheer arrogance or, pure and simple stupidity! Trump is threatening to sue the BBC, for a billion dollars in damages, for the defamation of character caused by one of the flagship news programmes of the BBC “Panorama” broadcast a week before the last presidential election.

BBC is the oldest public service broadcaster in the world, having commenced operations in 1922 and was once held in high esteem as the most reliable broadcaster in the world due to its editorial neutrality but most Sri Lankans realized it is not so now, due to the biased reporting during Sri Lanka’s troubled times. By the way, it should not be forgotten that the Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation is the second oldest public broadcaster in the world, behind the BBC by only three years, having commenced operations as ‘Colombo Radio’ on 16 December 1925; it subsequently became ‘Radio Ceylon’. It soon became the dominant broadcaster of South Asia, with a Hindi service as well, and I wonder whether there are any plans to celebrate the centenary of that great heritage but that is a different story.

The Panorama documentary titled “Trump: A Second Chance?” was broadcast on 28 October, days before the US presidential election held on 5th November 2024. No one, except the management of the BBC, was aware that this programme had a doctored speech by Trump till the British newspaper The Telegraph published a report, in early November, stating that it had seen a leaked BBC memo from Michael Prescott, a former independent external adviser to its editorial standards committee, sent in May. This memo pointed out that the one-hour Panorama programme had edited parts of a Trump’s speech which may convey the impression that he explicitly encouraged the Capitol Hill riot of January 2021. In fact, this is what most believe in and whether the editors and presenters of Panorama purposely doctored the speech to confirm this narrative remains to be seen.

In his speech, in Washington DC on 6 January 2021, what Trump said was: “We’re going to walk down to the Capitol, and we’re going to cheer on our brave senators and congressmen and women.” However, in Panorama he was shown saying: “We’re going to walk down to the Capitol… and I’ll be there with you. And we fight. We fight like hell.” The two sections of the speech that were edited together were more than 50 minutes apart and the “fight like hell” comment was taken from a section where Trump discussed how “corrupt” US elections were.

There is no doubt that Trump is very lax with words but that does not mean that the media can edit his speeches to convey a totally different meaning to what he states. The moment the memo was received, from its own advisor, the senior management of the BBC should have taken action. The least that could have been done is to issue a correction and tender an apology to Trump in addition to punishing the errant, after an inquiry. One can justifiably wonder whether the BBC did not take any action because of an inherent prejudice against Trump. Even if not so, how the events unfolded makes the BBC appear to be an organization incapable of monitoring and correcting itself.

In fact, a news item on 9 November in the BBC website titled, “Why is Donald Trump threatening to sue the BBC?”, referring to the memo states the following:

“The document said Panorama’s “distortion of the day’s events” would leave viewers asking: “Why should the BBC be trusted, and where will this all end?”. When the issue was raised with managers, the memo continued, they “refused to accept there had been a breach of standards”.

From these statements, it becomes very clear that all that the senior management wanted to do was a cover-up, which is totally inexcusable. After the expose by The Telegraph the BBC had been inundated by public complaints and faced criticism all round resulting in the resignations of the Director General and the Head of News. To make matters worse, the Chairman of the Board of Directors stated that he was planning to tender an apology to President Trump. If he had any common sense or decency, he would have done so immediately.

Worse still was the comment of the head of international news who tried to justify by saying that this sort of editing happens regularly. He fails to realise that his comment will make more and more people losing trust in the BBC.

Some are attempting to paint this as an attempt by those against the licence-fee funding model of the BBC to discredit the BBC but to anyone with any sense at all, it is pretty obvious that this a self-inflicted injury. Some legal experts are advising the BBC to face the legal challenge of Trump, failing to realise that even if Trump loses, the BBC would have to spend millions to defend. This would be the money paid as licence fees by the taxpayer and the increasing resistance to licence fee is bound to increase.

Overall, this episode raises many issues the most important being the role of the free press. British press is hardly fair, as newspapers have political allegiances, but is free to expose irregularities like this. Further, it illustrates that we must be as careful with mainstream media as much as we are with newly emerging media. When a respected organization like the BBC commits such blunders and, worse still. attempts to cover-up, whom can we trust?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.