An exceptional human being: Nihal Seneviratne

It was a real shock to read Prof. Tissa Vitarana’s piece “Nihal Seneviratne, an exemplary Secretary-General of Parliament” in the e-paper of  The Island on Saturday 10th January, as I was totally unaware that my good friend Nihal had died on the 6th and had been cremated the following day. Though he was 91-years-old, he was in pretty good health and whenever he mentioned about his advancing age, I used to tell him that he would hit a century. In fact, I was convinced that he would do so, after he recovered from a very bad attack of Chikungunya, though it took quite a long time for him to get back to normal. When I rang to reciprocate Aluth Aurudu wishes he sent on 13th April, I found that even chatting on the phone was an effort and learned, on inquiry, that he and his wife Srima had just got back after spending a week, and a fortune, in an intensive care unit of a private hospital. Despite the disability, he took the time and effort to send a message wishing me and my children a Suba sahitha, Duka rahita (full of joy, devoid of sorrow) new year. That is why I refer to him as an exceptional human being. Unfortunately, his wish did not come true, as losing a good friend like him, causes immense sorrow.

Manik de Silva, the Editor of the Sunday Island and a very close friend of Nihal, starts his poignant tribute “Nihal Seneviratne – God’s good man” (Sunday Island, 11 January) as follows:

“Nihal Seneviratne’s funeral on Wednesday was one of the best attended in recent times. He passed away on Tuesday after a short spell in hospital and no wonder a great many people came to bid him a final goodbye. He was not only a truly accomplished public servant with a 33-year long career in the legislature but was also God’s good man – humble, pleasant and ever ready to go out of his way to help anybody.”

I am sure it was Nihal’s wish to be cremated as soon as possible. This too illustrates the humility of the person who held one of the key posts in our democracy. Though qualified as a lawyer, he opted to join the administration of our legislature, forgoing a scholarship to USA, which he served for 33 years. He retired as the Secretary-General of the Parliament in 1988, after accomplishing the almost impossible task of in giving the lead to relocating everything from the Old Parliament in Galle Face to the new in Sri Jayewardenepura. Nihal chronicled his experience in the parliament, including the incident where a bomb was thrown by a JVP activist in the committee room which missed President JRJ, in two books “A Clerk Reminices” and “Memories of 33 Years in Parliament”, the latter being serialised in the Sunday Island recently.

As several articles have detailed his professional life, avoiding repetition I would be referring only to his side as ‘a good man – humble, pleasant, and ever ready to go out of his way to help anybody,’ as Manik has so correctly stated. He had a wide circle of friends and though I was not among the very long-standing, every time we met, Nihal gave me the impression that I was one of his closest. Therefore, the least I could do was to meet him every time I was in Sri Lanka. We had long chats about politics, religion and, of course, about his elder brother Prof Kirthi Nissanka Seneviratne who was my lecturer in Physiology and the founding director of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine. Unfortunately, he died prematurely but medics of our era never forget ‘Cock and Bull stories”; our Professor of Physiology being Prof Koch and the then Senior Lecturer Seneviratne being fondly referred to as ‘Bull’! However, their lectures were far from ‘cock and bull’, still ringing in my ears after six decades.

Nihal rang to comfort me when I lost my wife Primrose, unfortunately, in August 2024 and continued to be in touch to see whether I needed help. Whenever we met, he never forgot to ask me how Duwa and  Putha were and wanted me to ask them to call him if they needed anything to be done for them in Sri Lanka. On many occasions he offered to facilitate for my son to showcase his musical talents in Sri Lanka.

Though we had been communicating on WhatsApp regularly, Nihal rang me direct on 12th November to inquire how he could send a scarf to Duwa. Though I said I would send the address, I rang my daughter, who was in Colombo at the time, and requested her to surprise Uncle Nihal by visiting him, which she did. In fact, she could not believe when I gave the sad news as she found Uncle Nihal to be so hale and hearty when she visited, shortly before her return to the UK, the day before Ditwah struck.

After reading a piece in The Island about a reunion of ‘Over 80s old boys of Royal College’, where it was mentioned how briskly the 91-year-old Nihal walked in to the gathering, I rang him on 9th December and had a long chat, when he sounded really well, but in less than a month he is gone. That is the uncertainty of life!

The last communication I got was on 18 December, a forwarded video on TikTok, an interview with a Buddhist priest of Tamil heritage. The monk is from a Brahmin family and had been a Hindu Priest before embracing Buddhism and was talking, in impeccable Sinhala, about unity. It resonated very well with what I have been discussing, over the years, with Nihal. He was one of the most tolerant, cultured, humble human beings I ever met and take pride in saying that he was my friend.

Ocean cooling around Sri Lanka signals seasonal shift; DMC on Alert

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.