National Shoora Council condemns ‘unprovoked’ Israeli-US war on Iran

The National Shoora Council (NSC) in a statement has condemned the unleashing of an unprovoked war on Iran by Israel and the US, beginning 28 February.

It said the war would result in countless deaths of innocent civilians across the Middle East, endangering also the lives of millions of marginalised Asians, including Sri Lankans, employed in the Arab world, while escalating further the oil prices that would economically hit countries world-wide.

On Saturday morning, Israel attacked a school in South Iran killing nearly 60 girls–students in the primary school. The US followed by bombing the office of Iran’s Supreme Leader, killing Iran’s leader Imam Khamenei, aimed at a forcible regime change in the Islamic Republic, launched by these foreign colonising powers.

Sri Lanka, struggling to come out of economic bankruptcy, would be amongst the worst hit by this reckless US-Israeli war in the Middle East, let loose by the world’s arms mafia, hours after Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi rejoiced with Israeli PM Netanyahu, having signed 16 Agreements of Cooperation with Israel, globally perceived as an apartheid State, that had destroyed Palestine and committed to systemically grabbing Arab lands in the rest of the Middle East.

US Secretary of State Marco Rubio’s controversial speech delivered at the Munich Security Conference on 14 February is being seen as reigniting settler colonial control of non- white people worldwide as the dominant US-European strategy for the next hundred years. The US and Israel have already marginalised the UN to the detriment of third world countries.

Some of these ‘bleeders of blood of the innocents’ are using their deadly white supremacist militant State power, to decide through recourse to wars, as to who should rule across the globe, sovereign nations of others. Their endless wars over the past 200 years have brought disaster to third world countries one after the other, while enriching the arms-exporting countries.

Israel and the US have opened another murderous war in the Middle East that would adversely affect the life of every man, woman, and child in the world, but would be shamelessly watched with indifference by the leaders of religions, civil societies, and governments everywhere as if mass killings are normalised for the unarmed.