Dockyard announces key leadership changes with strategic Board appointments

Capt. (Retd.) Jagmohan appointed Chairman; Vish Govindasamy and Senthilverl Jr. join Board

Colombo Dockyard PLC yesterday announced significant changes to its Board of Directors, effective from 7 April 2026, marking a new chapter of strategic growth and governance excellence.

Following its recent acquisition, India’s Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Ltd., (MDL), which now holds a 51% majority stake in Colombo Dockyard, has nominated Thimira S. Godakumbura as one of their Nominee Directors. He will continue to serve as the Managing Director and CEO of Colombo Dockyard PLC.

Capt. (Retd.) Jagmohan has been appointed as the Chairman (Non-Executive) of Colombo Dockyard PLC. This landmark appointment brings a wealth of business acumen, extensive leadership experience, and visionary governance to the Board.

Capt. (Retd.) Jagmohan currently serves as Chairman and Managing Director of MDL. A Naval Architect from Cochin University of Science and Technology, he holds postgraduate and M.Tech qualifications in Naval Construction and Ocean Engineering from IIT Delhi and IIT Kharagpur. With over 25 years of distinguished service in the Indian Navy, he has held key assignments in the Directorate of Naval Design and Naval Dockyard, Mumbai. His prior roles include Director at Goa Shipyard Ltd., and Chief General Manager – Design at Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd., (GRSE), where he oversaw complex warship projects for the Indian Navy and Coast Guard. His appointment underscores MDL’s strategic commitment to infuse Colombo Dockyard PLC’s Board with unparalleled expertise, strengthening governance, operational excellence, and sustained growth.

Vish Govindasamy has been nominated by MDL as their Nominee Director (Non-Executive/Non-Independent).

He brings extensive experience as Deputy Chairman of Sunshine Holdings PLC and board memberships across prominent companies including Watawala Plantations PLC, Softlogic Life Insurance PLC, Dialog Axiata PLC, United Motors Lanka PLC, and Lanka Island Resort Ltd. Additionally, he serves on the Governing Board and Monetary Policy Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Govindasamy holds an MBA and a BSc in Electrical Engineering from the University of Hartford, US, and is a Fellow of the Institute of Certified Professional Managers, Sri Lanka.

Senthilverl Nandhanan has been nominated by Senthilverl Holdings Ltd., as their Nominee Director (Non-Executive/Non-Independent).

With over two decades of experience spanning the financial services, energy, fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG), and investment sectors, he currently serves as Non-Executive Director at Amana Bank PLC and Sarvodaya Development Finance PLC, while leading operations as Executive Director at Senthilverl Holdings Ltd., and CEO of Dollar Corporation. He was the former Director of Panasian Power PLC (2017-2021). He holds an MBA from the University of Southern Queensland, Australia. Senthilverl brings a wealth of strategic insight and operational expertise, particularly in financial services and corporate governance.