SHRM strengthens Sri Lanka presence

The Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM), the world’s largest HR professional association, with close to 340,000 members across more than 180 countries, has strengthened its presence in Sri Lanka, with dedicated local leadership and an expanded range of services for the HR professionals and organisations.

SHRM India and APAC Senior Director Consulting and BD Dedeepya (Dedu) Ajith John will lead SHRM’s business in Sri Lanka, while the respected Sri Lankan HR leader and coach Oshana Dias has been appointed as SHRM Sri Lanka Country Lead.

They will be supported by SHRM Senior Consultant Kaavya Sasidharan, who will work closely with the team on consulting engagements.

SHRM has maintained a presence in Sri Lanka through its relationship with the Association of Human Resource Professionals (AHRP). The strengthened direct presence marks the next phase of SHRM’s engagement with the market, providing the HR professionals and organisations with greater access to its global expertise, professional development resources and organisational consulting capabilities.

SHRM will continue to offer its memberships and globally recognised SHRM-CP (Certified Professional) and SHRM-SCP (Senior Certified Professional) certifications, while expanding access to consulting and capability-building solutions.

Its consulting portfolio covers organisational design, talent management, leadership development, workforce planning, HR transformation, research and assessment centres, supporting organisations in addressing broader workforce and organisational priorities.

The Sri Lankan HR professionals will also have access to a special SHRM membership rate of US $ 49 for a limited period. The membership provides access to SHRM’s global research, toolkits and templates, its Ask an Advisor service, discounted certification and event rates and connections with SHRM’s international professional community.

Furthermore, the local professionals and organisations will also receive direct support for the SHRM memberships and certifications, alongside access to programmes covering talent acquisition, compensation and benefits, HR and AI, change management, strategic business partnering, learning and development, HR analytics and diversity, equity and inclusion.

SHRM also plans to introduce master classes tailored to the Sri Lankan market, combining its global research and body of knowledge with practical learning for local practitioners.

The expanded presence will also create greater regional opportunities for Sri Lankan HR and business leaders. The 15th SHRM HR Excellence Awards, held as part of the SHRM India Annual Conference, are now open to Sri Lankan organisations and HR professionals.

The Sri Lankan delegates will also receive preferential access to SHRM Annual Conferences in India, MENA and the United States, including a special delegate rate of US $ 215 for the SHRM India Annual Conference and Expo on November 26 and 27, 2026, in New Delhi.

The organisations will additionally be able to access SHRM’s wider portfolio of research and thought leadership, assessment centres, corporate training and academies, executive development and leadership programmes.

“Sri Lanka has been an important market for SHRM over the years. During this time, we have had the privilege of working alongside AHRP, clients and HR leaders to strengthen the profession and build organisational capability.

Oshana’s appointment as Country Lead is a natural next step in deepening that relationship. Through dedicated on-ground leadership, supported by Dedeepya and Kaavya, we aim to combine regional experience, local insight and SHRM’s global capabilities to create greater impact for organisations and HR professionals in Sri Lanka,” said Khanna.

“I have seen first-hand the value that SHRM’s global standards, certifications and professional community can bring to the HR professionals in Sri Lanka. Establishing a stronger direct presence in the country allows us to deepen access to certification, extend SHRM’s advisory and capability-building expertise to more organisations and create more opportunities for Sri Lankan HR professionals to participate in SHRM’s regional awards, conferences and professional networks,” said Dias.