SLASSCOM calls for industry support to establish Accessibility Testing & QA Centre for hearing and visually impaired talent

SLASSCOM Past Chairperson Shehani Seneviratne and CSDB Executive Committee Chairman Harshana Perera

As Sri Lanka accelerates its digital transformation, the SLASSCOM Foundation is calling on the IT and BPM and corporate sectors to help build an Accessibility Testing & QA Centre of Excellence that will open new pathways for hearing and visually impaired individuals to enter and thrive in the technology sector.

Developed in collaboration with the Ceylon School for the Deaf and Blind (CSDB), the initiative marks a significant step towards a more inclusive digital economy, with the CSDB providing space at its Nippon Building in Ratmalana for an Accessibility Testing & QA Centre and capacity-building facility where the hearing and visually impaired individuals can gain industry-relevant skills, access assistive technologies and connect with employment opportunities in Sri Lanka’s technology sector.

A memorandum of understanding between SLASSCOM and CSDB was signed in June 2026, formally establishing the framework for collaboration. Under the agreement, SLASSCOM will coordinate the project, facilitate engagement with industry partners, sponsors and volunteers, support curriculum and training initiatives, provide guidance on accessibility testing standards and industry best practices and help create employability and revenue-generation opportunities.

A key component of the initiative is already underway, with SLASSCOM, with the support of the foundation, having completed an initial testing laboratory. The facility is intended to enable IT companies to outsource accessibility testing and quality assurance requirements, creating a practical avenue for industry participation while generating sustainable work opportunities for trained individuals.

To scale the centre’s impact, the SLASSCOM Foundation is seeking industry partners to support infrastructure, technology, assistive equipment and software, while providing accessibility testing and QA projects that create sustainable employment pathways for persons with disabilities. Partners will also gain visibility through recognition across project materials and branding within the centre, reinforcing their commitment to inclusive and responsible business.

The initiative has already attracted support from industry partners, with Nagarro serving as the Training and Mentoring Partner, Dialog Axiata as the Connectivity Partner and 99x as a Resource Partner. Additionally, Virtusa has extended manpower support towards the renovation and strengthening the centre’s operations.

Denver De Zilva, representing SLASSCOM’s sustainability forum said, “We are delighted to have the opportunity to collaborate in establishing and operationalising the long-awaited Accessibility Testing Lab and Inclusive Digital Employability Centre. This flagship initiative has the potential to create meaningful pathways for skills development and employment, while advancing accessibility testing capabilities and fostering inclusive digital innovation in Sri Lanka.”

“This initiative represents an opportunity for the technology industry to move beyond conversations around inclusion and create practical pathways into employment,” said SLASSCOM Immediate Past Chairperson Shehani Seneviratne.

“We can help hearing and visually impaired individuals build confidence and capabilities that open doors to employment and greater economic independence.”

CSDB Chairman EXCO Harshana Perera said, “The success of this centre will depend on strong collaboration between the CSDB, SLASSCOM and the wider technology industry. We invite companies to contribute not only through resources and expertise but also by creating real opportunities through accessibility testing and QA projects, helping build a sustainable model for the school where inclusion translates into tangible employment outcomes.”

This centre represents an opportunity to change lives and reshape how Sri Lanka’s digital economy sees and harnesses talent. With the support of the IT and BPM industry and corporate sector, the initiative can turn accessibility into opportunity, enabling deaf and visually impaired individuals to build careers, contribute their skills and take their place in Sri Lanka’s digital future.