When rivals embrace

There is much more to state visits of world leaders than a mere desire to strengthen bilateral relations. US President Donald Trump had several key items on his agenda when he visited China. So did his host, President Xi Jinping. The so-called summit diplomacy for Trump is an opportunity to strike trade deals, and pursue other commercial interests more than anything else. This time around, there was a difference. He sought to promote a peace plan as well.

Trump is keen to secure Beijing’s cooperation to end the Iran conflict, which has taken a turn neither he nor the Pentagon ever expected. Its fallout has dented Trump’s approval rating and adversely impacted the Republicans’ prospect of winning the upcoming midterm elections. Disruptions to global oil and fertiliser supplies due to the closure of the Hormuz Strait and other economic consequences of the war have not spared the US economy; they have caused inflation to rise in the US, and the Republicans fear that they might lose control of the Congress in November’s midterm elections. So, Trump sought China’s help to manoeuvre out of the Iran imbroglio.

The West Asia conflict became a live-fire laboratory for China, and Beijing would have gained from its prolongation if not for the fact the Chinese economy, which has shown signs of slowing down, is reeling from energy shocks. So, an early end to the conflict will serve China’s interests as much as America’s. However, for strategic reasons, China is not likely to go all out to pressure Iran to strike a peace deal with the US at least in the short run.

Few things apparently worry Trump more than the US trade deficit with China. His “tariff war” did not yield the desired results, and a recent court ruling has stood in the way of his power to increase tariffs whimsically. So, he expected to persuade China to buy more goods and services from the US. He announced, in a press interview, that China had agreed to purchase 200 Boeing jets, but the speculation was that the Chinese order would be much bigger. Trump also wanted to defuse trade tensions with Beijing and work towards a tariff deal favourable to the US. It is too early to say whether his efforts will reach fruition. Another item high on his agenda was securing improved market access for US companies, especially tech giants. He was accompanied by more than a dozen top CEOs, including SpaceX and Tesla’s Elon Musk, Apple’s Tim Cook and Goldman Sachs’s David Solomon. On Wednesday, Trump proudly introduced them to President Jinping as “distinguished representatives from the American business community who respect and value China”. The inclusion of those top business executives in Trump’s entourage prompted comedian and talk-show host, Stephen Colbert, to call Trump’s China visit “a fabulous billionaire boys’ trip”.

Having ruined his image internationally by carrying out unprovoked attacks on Iran, Trump needed some diplomatic success to boost his image amidst economic and geopolitical pressures. On the diplomatic front, Trump sought to use his Beijing visit to work towards stability in US-China relations without further escalation over Taiwan or trade.

Foremost on President Jinping’s mind is arresting an economic slowdown, and he obviously expected Trump’s visit to help soften the US position on tariffs and export restrictions hurting China. Jinping also sought expanded US cooperation on trade, AI and energy security. He is also keen to avoid a direct confrontation with the US and desirous of a continued dialogue. He was not so naïve to expect an assurance from Trump that the US would not resort to provocative actions regarding Taiwan. Hence, his warning to Trump on Thursday that mishandling the two nations’ disagreements over Taiwan could endanger China-U.S. relations. He has been quoted as saying, “If [they are] mishandled, the two nations could collide or even come into conflict, pushing the entire China-US relationship into a highly perilous situation.” Whether this warning would make the US mend its ways is a moot point.

Trump’s visit was a huge diplomatic success for Beijing, for it has demonstrated to the world that China is a very influential global actor, especially during international crises. Referring to his meeting with Jinping, Trump said on Wednesday, “There are those who say this may be the biggest summit ever.”

All in all, the Xi-Trump summit ended well. However, the prospects of positive outcomes from the high-level meeting hinges on how the two rival powers navigate contentious geopolitical and economic issues in a crisis-ridden world.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.