Appreciation: Rev. Fr. Wickrema Fonseka

The catholic church and the country lost a pastor, mentor and ayurvedic doctor in Fr. Wickrema Fonseka, a Catholic priest of the Archdiocese of Colombo whose life committed to the poor and the marginalised ended on February 23rd.

Controversial by nature and a person who provoked new thinking Fr. Wickrema believed always in swimming against the tide and trend.

It is easy to go with the accepted standards and norms in life where one would not have to encounter rejection. One who toes the line with the rest and feels accepted cannot be a Christian.

This is how many identified Fr. Wickrema who was fondly called ‘Wickrema Aiya’ (Brother Wickrama).

He entered priesthood after completing his studies in medicine at the University of Colombo as a result of his search for meaning in life.

For him priesthood was not what he saw in his childhood days as an attractive person in white robes with all the comfort and positions.

He was ordained a priest during one of the most tumultuous times in the country- the 1989-1990 era of violence and whether to side with the poor or not. Tose who took the side of the poor were expelled by the church hierarchy.

Fr. Wickrema just manage to escape ‘the jaws of termination’.

While in priestly formation he followed a progressive life style unique to him.

He took special interest in teaching poor children during his formative years at the Ampitiya National Seminary.

Fr. Wickrema was actively involved with the ‘Kithusara’ group and moved with youth who held progressive views about life.

He spent the money he inherited from the family to free those suffering from financial burdens.

His contemporaries recalled the commitment of Fr.Wickrema towards students who fell ill during his days at St. Joseph’s College where he served in several capacities. He was remembered as a mentor and formator who encouraged critical thinking among students.

He lead a simple lifestyle despite his academic and professional excellence.

Wishing a ‘ Prophetic Church of the poor’ he uttered the penitential verse-Mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima cupla during sermons for failing to respond to the social realties outside the church.

The struggles of the fisheries community, free trade zone workers, the plantation workers and university students were part and parcel to him.

He engaged with civil society groups and n confronted local politicians when they tried to silence him advocating for social and economic justice.

He had good hands for both care and healthcare which he did while serving the community in Diyalagoda. He healed both those who were mentally and physically ill and helped build houses for those displaced by Tsunami.

Though he had to retire and rest due to the illness he remained the ‘Unretired servant of the Lord’ till the last day.

Fr. Wickrema was interred at St. Joseph’s Church, Thillanduwa on February 25th following the requiem Mass celebrated at the church.

The invisible crisis: How tour guide failures bleed value from every tourist

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.