Richard Pieris Securities strengthens leadership

Richard Pieris Securities (Pvt.) Ltd has strengthened its leadership to drive the growth of the business and continue delivering trusted and professional stockbroking services to the clients across Sri Lanka.

The company welcomed the key management personnel, who bring a wealth of experience in stockbroking and investment services. With the appointments now in place, the Colombo Stock Exchange has revoked the intended suspension of the trading activities of Richard Pieris Securities, enabling the stockbroking firm to resume its operations.

The strengthened leadership structure is anchored by the appointment of a new Chief Executive Officer for Richard Pieris Securities, supported by experienced professionals across the key management positions, further reinforcing the company’s governance, regulatory compliance and commitment to delivering high standards of client service. With the company’s unwavering commitment to continuing its full portfolio of services, the strengthened leadership of Richard Pieris Securities marks a new chapter in providing the clients with continuity and professional support in navigating Sri Lanka’s capital market.

The company is supported by the Richard Pieris group (Arpico), one of Sri Lanka’s long-established and respected diversified conglomerates, with 17,000 employees. This backing provides a strong foundation as Richard Pieris Securities moves forward with its renewed leadership and long-term growth ambitions.

The Richard Pieris Securities management said, “We are pleased to begin this new chapter with a strengthened team and a clear commitment to serving our clients with professionalism, integrity and confidence. Our focus is fixed on delivering a strong client experience while maintaining the highest standards of governance and regulatory compliance. With the support of the Richard Pieris group and experience of our new leadership team, we look forward to building further on the trust our clients have placed in us.”

Richard Pieris Securities has expressed its appreciation to its clients, business partners and other stakeholders for their continued confidence placed in the company. With renewed energy and a strengthened foundation, Richard Pieris Securities remains committed to building lasting relationships with the investors and delivering reliable stockbroking services.