Sri Lanka has to pay more for vaccines

Colombo, Aug. 29 (Daily Mirror) - With the latest categorisation of Sri Lanka as an upper-middle-income country under the World Bank criterion, the health authorities will lose certain concessions enjoyed in the procurement of vaccines to be used under the national immunisation programme, an official said.

As a result, the Ministry, in a bid to avoid any compromise on the programme, is seeking to partner with UNICEF for vaccine purchases, the official said.

He said that Sri Lanka previously received certain vaccines under concessionary terms but would have to pay for the whole requirement from now onwards because of entry into the upper middle-income category.

“We will procure all the vaccines required under the national immunisation programme through UNICEF. We have to pay for all,” he said.

Asked about the additional cost involved, he said that is under estimation at the moment.

“We cannot compromise the immunisation programme no matter what. Therefore, we make sure that purchases are made in time,” he said.

The operational agreement is expected to be signed in this regard soon.

Sri Lanka has been reclassified as an upper-middle-income economy by the World Bank Group in its latest country income classifications released on July 1, 2026.

The annual classification, which assesses 218 economies based on Gross National Income (GNI) per capita using the World Bank’s Atlas methodology, placed Sri Lanka among five countries that moved from the lower-middle-income category to the upper-middle-income category this year. Jordan, Micronesia, the Philippines, and Viet Nam also achieved the upgrade.

Meanwhile, given the shortage of certain medicinal drugs in availability, the Health Ministry is also planning to make purchases through the procurement mechanism.

The UNDP Bureau for Management Services (BMS) Office of Procurement (OP) has established multiple Long-Term Agreements (LTAs) with commercial partners (manufacturers & suppliers/wholesalers) for the supply of medicines that meet the minimum UNDP quality assurance requirements.

UNDP has LTAs established for adult antiretroviral (ARV) medicines, adult and paediatric first-line anti-TB medicines, all malaria medicines, medicines for managing STIs and opportunistic infections, medicines to treat Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C, as well as a range of other essential medicines and medicines for treating non-communicable disease (NCDs), such as diabetes, hypertension, and cancers.

According to the official, Sri Lanka has currently 80 per cent of medicinal drugs secured but some oncological products are in short supply.