Valentine’s Day special …for a very worthy cause

Sri Lanka-born Chris Cannon is a very popular figure in the catering scene, in Melbourne, Australia, especially when it comes to Thai food.

He says he started the restaurant, known as Thai Street Food, five years ago, to help his Thai wife, who had a restaurant in Thailand, and is a great cook.

What’s extra special about Chris is that he does a charity event, every Valentine’s Day, for a very worthy cause – the Home of Compassion in Sri Lanka, run by Mother Theresa Sisters.

Last year’s event, he said, was a tremendous success and he had the support of the community where he resides.

This year the scene is set for Saturday, 14th February, from 7.00 pm to 11 pm, at the Springvale RSL, in Melbourne, with the duo Shey and George (of Redemption fame) and DJ Jeremy Ekanayake providing the music.

Says Chris, and old Thomian: “What we do, on Valentine’s Day, with the help of a few friends, is a total fundraiser, and it has been a tremendous success every year, with every cent collected going to the charity concerned.

“We just advertised this year’s event and everyone who attend our Valentine’s Day special last year, has booked again. It’s a sellout.

Before migrating to Australia, Chris was in the motorcar setup and worked in the Middle East, as well.

In Australia, he ran a Limousine Company for 30 years – the first to bring large limousines to Australia, including Hummers from the USA, to seat 20 passengers.

With his Thai Street Food booming, Chris is now very much into catering.

“We do a lot of catering for private parties, school and major events in Melbourne.”

However, he added that their Valentine’s Day charity projects will always remain a priority.

Chris and his family have plans to visit Sri Lanka in December this year.

Reading our unfinished economic story through Bandula Gunawardena’s ‘IMF Prakeerna Visadum’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.