Weligama killing: More questions

Partisan politics has spared hardly anything in this country. It is therefore not surprising that the government and the Opposition are engaged in a fierce political battle over the recent assassination of Weligama Pradeshiya Sabha Chairman Lasantha Wickremesekera. The Opposition has blamed the NPP for the killing, which, the government says, was due to an underworld gang rivalry. Both sides are trading allegations liberally in a bid to settle political scores. If only they kept an open mind, without letting their political rivalries get the better of them.

No sooner had Wickremesekera been gunned down inside his office than Public Security Minister Ananda Wijepala claimed in Parliament that the victim had been involved in underworld activities and therefore he had become a target of rival gangs. The Opposition has used his statement to bolster its argument that the government is trying to justify the killing by vilifying the victim.

The suspected killer of Wickremasekera was arrested on Sunday in Colombo. The police said he had scuffled with them and escaped during a raid in Kekirawa before being arrested in Colombo. They said the STF and the army had backed the team that raided the hideout where the suspected assassin and his accomplices were staying. If so, how come the main suspect made good his escape? Aren’t the STF and the army equal to the task of preventing an underworld figure from escaping during a military-style raid?

Curiously, the police interrogated the suspected gunman in full view of the media. They extracted a confession from him in public as if to prove Public Security Minister Wijepala’s claim in Parliament that the underworld was behind Wickremesekera’s killing. The suspect said the order for the killing had come from an underworld figure called Dubai Lokka, and he had just carried it out for money.

What the police should have done on Sunday was to take the suspect to the CID headquarters and interrogate him there. There is no need for everything he reveals to be made public. The police in their wisdom also disclosed how the suspect had been traced. The methods used by the police to trace criminals are best kept under wraps. The police have demonstrated a lack of professionalism and a desire to please the government. They were apparently in a mighty hurry to have the public believe that there had been no political motive for the killing of Wickremesekera.

It does not necessarily follow from the alleged involvement of Dubai Lokka in the assassination of Wickremesekera that the crime was committed due to a gang rivalry. The likes of Dubai Lokka are known to carry out political killings at the behest of politicians.

One may recall that Makandure Madush, who became Sri Lanka’s Napoleon of Crime, as it were, also worked for politicians, and it is believed that he would have squealed on them if he had been detained and questioned further. He was killed while in police custody; the police claimed he had perished during a shootout between them and an underworld gang. It is doubtful that any intelligent person took that narrative seriously. The same can be said of the claim that the suspected assassin of Wickremesekera escaped during the Kekirawa raid, which was carried out with military precision.

Now that the aforesaid suspected underworld button man has admitted that he worked for Dubai Lokka, it won’t be possible to know who actually wanted Wickremasekera killed until Dubai Lokka is arrested and questioned.

Meanwhile, the police must be made to explain why they had not taken any action against Wickremesekera, who, they have said, had underworld links, and why they did not heed his letter to the IGP, complaining of threats to his life and asking for protection. The police should have at least guarded the Weligama PS building while the victim and other councillors were meeting the public. The police even guarded a party office that the JVP grabbed from the FSP in Yakkala last month, didn’t they?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.