WHAT’S THE NEWS?

I watch all the news channels available to us in Sri Lanka—BBC. Al Jazeera, CNN, CGTN ( China), NDTV (india), News France and Euro News. Naturally I do so at different times of the day. One thing strikes me forcibly: It is the constant repetition of news that takes place on most channels – notably the BBC and Al Jazeera.

Ergo, I have to ask “Are we being told what is ACTUALLY going on in the world in its entirety or are we getting what Is deemed politic to let us know?” For instance are we being forced to follow the tally stick of Trump’s successes by the blandishment of a servile press or is there a less fallacious story?

I try to react sensibly to both the TV programmes as well as to the Press but of late my emotions have not been on a particularly even keel. Many of my acquaintances tell me they do not bother to read the newspapers. They read whatever they want online thus missing out on a great deal of supposedly interesting goings on in the world. Many react to neither the press nor the TV showing a stoic, if rather bovine, attitude to affairs surrounding them. And because of this, I am sure they sleep better at night than I do.

The story of the Iranian women- footballers seeking Australian sanctuary, and then reneging, has now been mentioned so often over the last few days that I must say I don’t really care where they decide to live. In fact how many of us need constant reminding of such trivia?

Of ongoing interest Is President Trump who dominates most of the news in any case. His contradictory statements, his brash attitude at press conferences, his airy dismissal of previous statements, his ability to seemingly be on top of everything absolutely mesmerizes me. Can anyone be so narcissistic? I imagine that sensible Americans – even sensible Republicans – must be writhing in embarrassment at some of Trump’s more blatant utterances.

Poet Robert Frost (Trump’s compatriot from a long gone era) said that we would all go insane if we could not laugh. He lived long before Trump put in an appearance but it is certainly an apt comment at this moment in history when Trump’s very name evokes derisive laughter.

Another highly irritating observance which is often made by Western leaders is that they refer to ‘The World’ which in reality only encompasses the WESTERN world. Recently, I cannot quite recall when (as my retentive memory is not what it was) some European Chancellor made the remark that Europe was responsible for the future of the world.

Let’s examine that astounding comment. Europe has approximately 750 million people as its citizens. The rising influence of countries like China and India relegate that Chancellor’s claim to the realms of idiocy. Europe comprises around 44 countries and if one adds Russia, Turkey and one or two others it can total nearly 50 sovereign countries. Population wise Asia is well ahead. Some one needs to remind Europe that the days colonization are well past.

Of course the news is sometimes contradictory. Trump claims Iran is virtually bombed to submission while Iran carries on making strike after strike on the American bases in the Gulf States and most successfully defending itself. It is left to us, the hapless viewers, to decode the news as best we can and wonder where we stand amid all this turmoil.

Elected Heads of countries should not display ignorance of the constitutions of important countries. Trump declared this morning (March 17th) that he is annoyed with Starmer for his lack of support because Starmer “Can do what he likes.” Obviously Trump does not know that the British Constitution does not allow Starmer to do as he likes. The British PM is ‘primus inter pares’ meaning ‘first among equals’ in the British Cabinet and does not have the right to act on his own.

Talking of leaders reminds of one of Asia’s – if not the world’s greatest rulers – namely the Moghul Emperor Akbar whose biography I have just finished reading. Akbar was illiterate. He was probably dyslexic which is why he could never sit still long enough to learn to do so. He made up for this with a formidable memory and an unmatchable skill in governing the varied races of India. In these days of upheaval we need an Akbar at the helm of world affairs. The only problem here is that we need an Enlightened Dictator to direct world affairs. Obviously not a remote possibility. Still, I can dream can’t I?

Just the other day, one of my ex-pupils asked me whether I was following the Gaza War. (As if one has any choice in the matter seeing that it is on the news channels daily and at irritatingly frequent intervals) The news unblushingly records Israel’s behavior without comment as to its legality or barbarity.

The Ukraine has a leader who is illegal himself if one wants to be honest. He is my LEAST favourite personality at the moment. He needed to stand for election years ago and has overstayed his period of office by years. How come no country has mentioned all this? Gossip has it that some time ago his wife took 60 ladies abroad on a fashion display and leads a social life worthy of fashionistas anywhere. Of course this is just gossip as I hasten to say but, frankly, I like gossip!

Watching the SAME leaders, up to the SAME antics, being accepted by the SAME countries is frustrating in extreme. One recalls the words of a humourist who said that anyone has the right to go to hell in his own way. Truly it seems to me that this is happening to many of us but it is not always our own choice – going to hell I mean! The news channels give ample evidence of the folly of leaders who impact the world having neither the education nor the wisdom to govern. Fate is fickle indeed.

Despite the usual barrage of unimportant criticism from the opposition, our own government cannot be faulted for trying. Of course they make mistakes. Vijitha Herath should start using interpreters when he speaks to a non-Sinhala audience. But these are parlous times. The global situation cannot be helped by anything Sri Lankans do. Our nation is at the mercy of affairs out of our control. Is this not the best time for all parties to make a UNITED effort to plan and work out how best Sri Lanka should operate till this world crisis is over?

The barrage of regular criticism, from the opposition leader specially, is upsetting and valueless. It overheats our imaginations and pushes our emotions to a crescendo. Let us praise whatever deserves praise and halt criticisms of the Government for the moment, The world is in frightening new territory and we desperately need a CALM and deft government. ALL Sri Lankans should use every iota of their intelligence and patriotism to see us through these next months of turbulence. Togetherness has never been more vitally desired or needed.

Let us use formidable national vigour forgeting political and personal differences for the time being. Let us attempt to govern our Resplendent Isle with honesty and UNITY. Quarelling can resume AFTER this world crisis is over!!

More about President Premadasa – his caring nature & lack of trust in people

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.