HNB Assurance Marks Major Milestones in Its Technological Transformation Journey

HNB Assurance PLC successfully completed all major phases in its multi-year transformation program, an integral component of the Technological Transformation Pillar under the company’s SET Framework – (Sales Force Expansion, Exceptional Customer Service and Technological Transformation), introduced in 2022 when the company introduced its strategy to achieve 10% market share by 2026.

As part of the technology pillar, HNBA undertook a complete redesign and redevelopment of its core insurance management system to enhance agility, operational resilience, and digital capability across all customer touchpoints. The new core system NSure Insurance Suite, powered by KGiSL- a BFSI-centric Multiproduct Enterprise Software Product Company, went live in mid-2024, followed by the successful completion of full data migration in 2025. With these phases completed, HNB Assurance is now gearing up for the next stage, Java migration, which will further optimize performance and scalability. Additionally, KGiSL has trained and certified HNBA’s teams on maximizing NSure’s capabilities, empowering them to achieve minimal TAT and consistent operational excellence.

Speaking on the organization’s transformation journey, Lasitha Wimalaratne, Executive Director / Chief Executive Officer of HNB Assurance PLC “This transformation is not just a system upgrade, it is a reinvention of how we serve our customers, partners, and employees. Over the past few years, our teams have worked tirelessly to rebuild our technological backbone while keeping customer needs at the center.”

Chief Information Officer / GM Suneth Jayamanne of HNB Assurance PLC, added, “Modernizing a core system of this scale required precision and a great deal of discipline from every stakeholder involved. With the data migration now complete, we are entering the next critical phase, Java migration. This will unlock even greater system performance, improve integration capabilities, and strengthen our ability to innovate faster. We are confident that our upgraded core will serve as a solid foundation for the next decade of digital evolution.”

Sampath Bank Expands Sustainable Mobility Access Through Strategic Partnership with Hayleys Mobility

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.