SEC and CSE continue drive to broad base stock market

The Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC) and Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) recently conducted more investor forums in Galle, Badulla, Ratnapura, Gampaha, Kegalle & Kuliyapitiya.

These events aim to raise awareness on investor protection, educate the public on how to invest in the stock market, and leverage on the opportunities present in the capital market. The forums attracted over 800 participants collectively, providing valuable insights to both potential and existing investors in the said regions.

Each forum also featured a senior SEC representative who provided an overview of the SEC’s role in the equity market, investor protection, and the conduct expected from investors and traders. Mr. Suneth Perera, Acting Director – Supervision, SEC, spoke at the forums in Galle and Badulla, while Nimal Kumarasinghe, Manager – External Relations, SEC, spoke at the forums in Ratnapura, Gampaha, Kegalle and Kulipitiya.

Potential investors and first-time investors were also provided with an opportunity to learn about Unit Trust Investments and their potential for higher returns through the rising capital market. Speakers at the forums included Naleen Sadesh, Portfolio Manager – Investments, Asset Trust Management (Pvt) Ltd at the Galle and Badulla investor forums; Ms. Suresha Fernando, Fund Manager and Ms. Hansini Aravinda Snr., Financial Analyst of CT Smith Asset Management Ltd at the Gampaha forum; and Dilan Jayakody Senior Business Development Manager of JB Financial (Pvt) Ltd at forums in Ratnapura, Kegalle and Kuliyapitiya.

The forums also featured in-depth analyses of sectoral performance and market opportunities by leading stock brokering firms, which highlighted the opportunities provided by the low-interest rate environment that made the capital market more attractive than traditional investment options with declining returns. Speakers at the forums included Ms. Kaveena Nanayakkara – Snr. Research Analyst of NDB Securities (Pvt) Ltd at the Galle, Badulla and Kuliyapitiya Investor Forums; Kapila Pathirage, Director – Sales, HNB Stockbrokers (Pvt) Ltd at the Ratnapura Investor Forum; Iranga Fernando, Research Analyst at Bartleet Religare Securities (Pvt) Ltd at the Gampaha forum; and Chamath Wickrama Arachchi, Research Analyst at Asha Securities Ltd at the Kegalle investor forum.

The main feature of each of the forums was an interactive panel discussion with the participation of members of the SEC, CSE and leading stock-brokering firms. The Badulla and Gampaha forum panelists; Suneth Perera, Acting Director – Supervision, SEC; Niroshan Wijesundere, Senior Vice President – Marketing, CSE; Naleen Sadesh; and Ms. Kaveena Nanayakarra, with the Galle Forum moderated by Priyantha Heenpella and the Badulla forum moderated by Jeewan Chathuranga.

The Ritz-Carlton Yacht Collection makes their maiden call to Sri Lanka with Aitken Spence Travels, docking at Colombo & Galle

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.