Corruption: Cop in police crosshairs

The police are always in the news for the wrong reasons. This time around, they have made headlines over a corrupt deal and a hostile campaign against an intrepid whistleblower in uniform who exposed it.

A senior police officer is reported to have incurred the wrath of his superiors for having blown the lid off a procurement racket in the Police Department. The Opposition says the officer sought to have someone make a complaint to the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption about the corrupt deal, as he had no other way of bringing it into the national spotlight. The whistleblower is now in the crosshairs of his superiors, who have allegedly launched a witch-hunt against him.

A newly formed Opposition alliance is scheduled to hold its inaugural rally in Nugegoda on 21 Nov., and it is sure to take up the allegations of corruption against the police top brass. Pivithuru Hela Urumaya leader and former Minister Udaya Gammanpila yesterday tore into IGP Priyantha Weerasooriya for the sorry state of affairs in the police, and sought to implicate the latter in the hostile campaign against the beleaguered whistleblower. It behoves the police to counter the Opposition’s allegations and clear their name, if possible.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has vowed to rid the police of all rogue elements in the pay of drug dealers. His efforts will surely have the blessings of all right-thinking people. However, the task he has undertaken is no less arduous than the Labours of Hercules. One can only hope that he will succeed in his endeavour. He ought to make a similar effort to cleanse the police of corruption as well. Now that an alleged procurement racket therein has come to light, the government must order a thorough probe into it.

The police have a pivotal role to play in the ongoing anti-corruption drive, and therefore they must be made to put their own house in order. Most of all, efforts being made in some quarters to hound the whistleblowing cop out of his job must be frustrated.

The NPP government, which enlisted the support of trade unions to capture power, seems to consider it infra dig to listen to workers. Many university teachers threw their weight behind the NPP in last year’s election campaigns, and some of them are in the NPP’s parliamentary group. But the teachers of the Rajarata University have had to resort to a strike to pressure the government to appoint a Vice Chancellor and take action against some administrators for alleged malpractices. They issued repeated warnings before launching their strike, which could have been averted if the government had heeded their protests.

A few months ago, an NPP Minister bragged that trade unions would become redundant under the current dispensation because all workers’ problems would be solved in double-quick time. But workers still have to launch strikes to make the government negotiate with them, much less solve their problems.

A defining feature of all Sri Lankan governments has been their penchant for ignoring worker’s problems until they find expression in protracted trade union battles that cripple state sector institutions.

The issues that have driven the Rajarata dons to strike are not difficult to resolve. A university needs a Vice Chancellor and allegations of malpractices must be probed expeditiously. After all, the NPP has embarked on a crusade against corruption. Why the government has not cared to get the protesting teachers’ representatives around the table and make a serious effort to solve their problems through negotiations is the question.

Sri Lankan universities are characterised by inordinate delays, and strikes by teachers or others will only make an already bad situation worse.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.