Free school uniform decision taken in minutes on a platform in Bakmuna

January 1992 was a particularly hectic period. During its first week we were in Delhi. On Jan. 17 the Presidential Mobile Service at Kalutara Madhya Maha Vidyalaya began. On the 19th, I had to leave for Polonnaruwa for the free school book distribution ceremony to be held at Bakamuna. The function was on the morning of the 20th. At these functions the Secretary had no particular role to play except to sit for three hours on the main stage. Therefore I did not even bother to take my spectacles along, leaving them behind in the hotel.

According to the programme, speeches by politicians were interspersed with song and dance items by children, and the entire proceedings were telecast as well as broadcast live nationally. There was a large crowd present which appeared to be somewhat lively and enthusiastic. Everything proceeded smoothly until Mrs. Sunethra Ranasinghe, the Project Minister for Education Services began speaking. The President’s speech was to follow.

I was seated somewhere at the back as I preferred to on such occasions. Suddenly, I saw the President looking back, and I heard him asking “Where is Dhannasiri?” I quickly got up and went up to him. He seemed elated at the largeness of the crowd and their response. He said, “I want to give free school uniforms to the children from next year. Each one would require at least two sets isn’t it?” I was completely stunned, but stammered. “To all?” He said “Yes.”

I had the presence of mind to say “But there are 4.2 million children.” He said, “In that case we can make it one uniform,” and continued, “Can you work out the cost?” “When?” I inquired. What he said to this would have killed me if I had a weak heart. “Now,” replied the President, “I want to announce it in my speech!” That was President Premadasa. He went on the basis that nothing was impossible and many a public servant was faced with an impossible deadline. This day it seemed to be my turn.

I walked back to my seat in a daze. I realized that I had probably about six to seven minutes before the President got up to speak. I didn’t have a calculator with me, nor indeed my pair of spectacles! Fortunately one of my accountants who happened to be standing at the back of the stage had with him a calculator. I got down to work. Out of the 4.2 million children I knew that around half were girls. About 1.9 million I knew, were in Primary years one to five. Again the distribution between boys and girls being on a 50 percent basis.

These would require less cloth for their uniforms than older children. Then, I knew that boys got into longs at around year nine. In years six, seven and eight they would be in shorts, needing less cloth than longs. Having a son I roughly knew the number of meters required for a pair of shorts and a pair of longs and the approximate cost of a meter. I also knew the numbers involved at each level of the system including the two “A Level” years of 12 and 13.

But about girls I was clueless. I could have got this information from Mrs. Ranasinghe. But she was not only speaking, but I could see that she was into the final stretch of her speech. The nearest wife of a Minister seated on the stage was Mrs. P. Dayaratne, wife of the Minister of Power and Energy. I knew that she had at least one daughter because she had participated in some function which I had previously attended. Mrs. Dayaratne was very kind and gave me information about the cloth required for a dress at primary level and thereafter, at more senior levels and the approximate cost of the cloth.

My Accountant was now squatting by my side with his calculator, and we began to calculate costs. I was praying that Mrs. Ranasinghe would go on speaking for a little longer. But as we were reaching the final stages of the computation I heard Mrs. Ranasinghe say “And finally.” All I could do was to silently pray that finality would not be too abrupt that it would be somewhat prolonged. In the end, we got the figure of approximately Rs. 700 Million, about two minutes before Mrs. Ranasinghe concluded her speech.

I walked quickly up to the President, gave him the figure, but warned him that there could be up to a 20 percent margin of error. He appeared startled at the cost indicated and said “can’t be so much.” The next minute he had to get up to speak. But he was now more cautious. To the vast cheers of the multitude he announced that “With effect from next year I will also try my best to give one set of school uniforms free to every child once a year.” The people cheered so loud and so long the effect of which was clearly visible on the President’s face, that I knew that there was no going back.

There was no question of “trying my best.” The die was cast. Therefore, it didn’t surprise me at all, that after the President sat, he started looking for me again. “Dharmasiri, when are you going to Colombo?” he inquired. “In the late afternoon, after lunch,” I replied. “When you go, please ring up. Mr. Paskaralingam (The Secretary to the Treasury) and tell him to make provision next year for a set of school uniforms for all children,” he instructed.

By the time I conveyed this message to Mr. Paskaralingam, the President had already phoned him. This was also typical of the President’s style of governing. He never entrusted an important message to one single person. He gave this responsibility to several and often followed up personally. Mr. Paskaralingam who had not quite got over the shock by the time I phoned him was muttering, “He thinks we have a printing press, printing currency in the Treasury.”

“Dharmasiri, couldn’t you stop him?” he then asked both in frustration and desperation. “If I did not have the presence of mind, it would have been two uniforms, not one”, I replied. Thus ended this remarkable episode, where on the spur of the moment the government was committed to what in the end turned out to be a remarkably accurate calculation of around Rs. 700 million made in such haste and desperation.

This whole thing also vindicated President Premadasa’s belief that nothing was impossible, and that given the necessary conditions a calculation of this magnitude could be done under 10 minutes even without one’s spectacles! In all such matters, however the central issue is keeping one’s nerve and not panicking. These memoirs would show that I have had considerable practice and experience of this starting from my school days.

Apart from the inherent interest of the episode itself, it once again brought to light how governments sometimes take important policy decisions even of great financial magnitude, virtually on the spur of the moment. Such an enormous annual commitment of resources was never discussed anywhere. The Ministries of Finance and Education knew nothing of it. There was not a single scrap of paper or a single conversation or discussion held on the subject. A commitment of around Rs. 700 Million literally came out of the blues of Bakamuna.

The issue is not about the desirability of the undertaking. Given the income levels in the country, the decision could be interpreted as a progressive one, and a part of the overall poverty alleviation exercise. It certainly helped in maintaining and even increasing school attendance, minimized dropping out, and would have retained more children in the only system available which gave them an early opportunity to break out of poverty, and make them upwardly mobile. To these important extents President Premadasa’s instincts were right.

But the deep flaw lay in not examining and analyzing all possible alternatives or different permutations and combinations. Questions of affordability and opportunity costs were never analyzed. Later, expenditure increased, because pupil Bhikkus studying in their traditional seats of learning, the Pirivenas, were extended the same privilege. There was the important aspect that you couldn’t suddenly divert Rs. 700 million from the economy, with a war going on, and not affect other important areas competing for scarce funds.

Different scenarios could have been looked at. For instance, if uniforms were provided for those in the five years of primary schooling, the expenditure would have been less than half. Educationists all over the world, regard the first five years as the most crucial period of a child’s education. Apart from the acquisition of literacy and numeracy, these years constitute the base or foundation for further education, training and skills development. Therefore, bringing in as many children as possible into the school system, and then retaining them was most important.

A free set of school uniforms could certainly have been a spur to all these. But a non targeted, across the broad decision to give this benefit to everyone irrespective of need or income levels was less defensible. If the country had almost unlimited resources it would have been different. But we were far from that position. This experience was yet another illustration of the difficulties inherent in policy analysis and policy formulation in government. That Sri Lanka is not alone in this experience is manifest in the wide literature available on this critical subject.

One of the things I noticed in President Premadasa’s style of government was the careful and organized manner in which he kept in touch with important constituencies and interest groups in the country. His technique was to invite such large representative groups to the auditorium of the Presidential Secretariat in the old Parliament building and have a seminar with them. He also made it a point to treat them extremely well, not only with food and drink, but also with various gifts, which he often obtained from different sponsors.

One such occasion I attended was when he summoned the “A Level” students from various parts of the island who had fared best at the “A Level” examinations. Their parents or guardians were invited too. At these times the President showed that he was a most skilled communicator. He not only spoke so as to inspire his audience, but he was also very successful in drawing the children out to express their own views.

He put them at ease and created a homely atmosphere. He stressed the importance of English, and encouraged them to diligently pursue it. He enumerated the difficulties and handicaps he faced in his own life and how he overcame them through struggle and persistence. When the time came for a vote of thanks on behalf of the assembled students, he persuaded the boy who was to deliver it, and who came from a rural school, to speak in English.

After much persuasion and coaxing he started, and then after a few sentences froze. No words escaped his lips. In a masterpiece of psychological reinforcement, the President gently spoke to him, related how he faced similar situations in his early life and gave him the confidence to continue. It ended up as a very creditable performance. It was also a clear and visible demonstration of the President’s powers of communication and his ability to build confidence in others. It was impressive to watch.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris)

NO WINNERS IN WAR: Lessons the world refuses to learn from earlier conflicts

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.