Our scene for Top Model of the World 2026

Netalie Withanage is new to our modelling scene but she is already in the spotlight … in an awesome way. Yes, she has been selected to represent Sri Lanka at the Top Model of the World pageant and she is all excited to a part of this happening.

In fact, the exciting scene for Netalie began in March, this year, when she took top honours at the Colombo Fashion Week ‘New Face’ audition.

A couple of weeks later, under the guidance of Brian Kerkoven, she found herself on the ramp at the prestigious Colombo Fashion Week event, held from 01to 04 April.

The 19-year-old dark tan Fashion Model, who stands 5ft 8 inches in height, loves reading, and anything connected with literature.

She studied at the Seventh-Day Adventist High School in Kandana and excelled in English, winning several school prizes, we well.

Having now come into the spotlight, as a model, Netalie says she is keen to get fully involved in this scene.

Of course, she has the potential to excel at the Top Model of the World pageant and is working hard at achieving her goal.

Founded in Miami, in 1993, Top Model of the World is run by the World Beauty Organisation and focuses on professional modelling careers — runway skills, photographic presence, and industry potential — not just beauty. It’s billed as the world’s largest international modelling contest.

This year’s contest is being held in Sahl Hasheesh, near Hurghada, Egypt, at the V Luxury Resort, with the grand finale at THE ARENA on 08 June, 2026.

Egypt is hosting it again after a successful 31st anniversary edition in Hurghada.

Previous finals have been held in Shanghai, Berlin, Miami, Hong Kong, Sharm El Sheikh and Cairo.

Around 40 elite models, from around the globe, will be competing, this year, and the programme includes professional photoshoots and video shoots with Egypt’s top photographers, plus art videographers from Germany.

The content goes into the models’ portfolios for real career building.

The reigning winner is Natalia Garizabal (24) from Santa Marta, Colombia, and now the global attention is on the successor to Natalia Garizabal.

Will Sri Lanka’s Netalie Withanage step into Garizabal’s shoes and leave a lasting mark on the fashion stage?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.