Ending my tenure at the Employees’ Trust Board

LESSONS FROM MY CAREER: SYNTHESISING MANAGEMENT THEORY WITH PRACTICE – PART 24

For those who have not read my previous stories, I continue with my experiences as the Chairman of the ETF Board.

Southern Provincial Council Elections of 1994 The Southern Provincial Council Elections were announced, and it was obvious that the present government would lose. A new entrant to politics was Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, who had returned from overseas. She was the daughter of two Prime Ministers and thus became a new attraction. When electioneering was in full swing, I was careful to be seen as neutral and to avoid violating any election laws.

The election date was fixed for late March 1994. After the demise of President Premadasa, His Excellency D. B. Wijetunga was at the helm as President. One day, he called me and said, “You are a political appointee and therefore should be engaged in canvassing. I want you to actively participate and campaign in one of the difficult areas.” I responded that I had no knowledge of electioneering and was totally unfit for that sort of work. He did not take no for an answer. I was wondering how to get out of this and was planning various excuses.

It was the first day of the Royal Thomian match in 1994, and I was there with some friends. I suddenly received a call from President Wijetunga. Still, I couldn’t hear a word he was saying because the papare bands and Baila music were in full swing. I quickly moved to a quieter corner and spoke. The Prime Minister Ranil WickremEsinghe was going to the Southern Province, he said, and arrangements had been made for him to address a meeting at Beliatta. Beliatta was the electorate where our ancestral home at Getamanna was located. Apparently, the PM was planning to have lunch at my parents’ place. I was ordered by the President to go to my ancestral home, meet the PM, and attend the meeting.

I went early the next day to our ancestral home in Getamanna, which was at the edge of the Beliatta electorate. The PM came, had lunch, and was leaving when he looked at me and said, “If you are coming for the meeting, you may come with me”. I had no choice. I asked my driver to follow and travelled with the PM. Although my plan was to get to Colombo after the PM left for the meeting after lunch, I was dragged into this. My attempts to scoot off without climbing to the stage were also nullified because the entire entourage was escorted to the stage, including me. I was given a seat in the second row and was probably noticed by supporters of Hon. Mahinda Rajapaksa. After some time, I quietly left the stage and came back to Colombo. I had done my duty as a “political appointee”.

The election was heating up, and the President called me and asked what the general feeling was in the province. I said, “No chance, sir.” He didn’t believe me and said, “But the tide is again turning back to us, isn’t it?”. I had to bring him to reality. The election result was as expected, thanks to the new hope offered by the People’s Alliance’s leader.

With the government’s defeat at the Provincial Council Elections, I knew my time was up. I had anyway had enough of a high-ranking Government job. Even if the UNP returned to power, the new policy was to give high posts to those who worked on the elections and to party loyalists. The Premadasa policy of appointing young professionals was no longer in vogue. So, I would be out in any event.

This was when I decided it was time to start a career in consulting and training. During my tenure at the ETF Board, I was frequently invited by government and private organisations to speak on productivity techniques — my pet subject — and on the Japanese techniques I had mastered. I did not get paid, but received a gift which had no real value to me. I ended up with a vast collection of expensive and cheap pens, ties with the company logo that I could not wear anywhere else, and shirts that were far from my taste. I recall being invited to deliver a lecture to the top rung of the Air Force. I was told that the Air Force top brass would only listen to another Chairman or someone at that level, which is why I was selected for the lecture. These were unsafe times, and I was told that the venue could not be disclosed, but I had to be ready on time, and an air force vehicle would pick me up and whisk me to the venue.

The lecture was attended by the Air Force Chief, a few other deputies, and other senior ranks. I received a nice Air Force tie, which I still preserve but never wore. Therefore, I believed that I could turn all these opportunities into money. I registered a company called “Productivity Techniques Pvt Ltd” and kept it dormant until I resigned from the ETF Board. Within a month or so of my departure from the ETF Board, I had my first seminar. All stories in this new exercise will be in a new chapter.

The run-up to the election was also tricky. I had to refuse the Minister’s request to paste a poster all over with the ETF benefits and the Minister’s photograph. The Board agreed with me that we may be accused of violating election laws. The Minister, being a reasonable man, accepted the position. The President wanted me to join the campaign in Polonnaruwa, but I escaped once again.

The stock market was in a bear run because market participants preferred a UNP government to a more socialist People’s Alliance. Our investment committee felt that it was a good time for ETF to buy at attractive prices, given our ability to hold for an extended period. Despite this position of ours, at a meeting with the business community, the opposition presidential candidate openly accused the ETF of selling in the market to create fear among investors and destabilise the market. The accusation was that selling out of the ETF portfolio was taking the stock market down. Actually, we were buying, not selling, and there was plenty of proof. Politicians sometimes make sweeping statements without evidence, which I witnessed firsthand during my time in government. The Minister asked me to write to the candidate and explain the correct position, which I did. This led to anonymous calls being received, threatening that I would be thrown out as soon as they came to power, and many other life-threatening threats.

As expected, Her Excellency Chandrika  Bandaranaike Kumaratunga was elected with a thumping majority, and Hon Mahinda Rajapakse became the Minister of Labour. I still went to the office for a day or two, until I was told by the Ministry’s Secretary to hand in my resignation as per the new Minister’s request. I did so and went home.

I had a visitor from the UK and was boasting to him about the new female President, the daughter of two Prime Ministers and enlightened him that we produced the first female PM in the world. He retorted, “Oh, I know all that. In fact, we Britons blame Sri Lanka for setting the trend and giving us Margaret Thatcher!”

My experience at the ETF Board was rewarding because I turned a very sleepy, lethargic institution into a highly efficient and progressive one. It was full of challenges, too. I learned to manage politicians, trade unions, unhappy employers, and the staff.  I had used the theoretical concepts learned in my MBA. I synthesised them with my tacit knowledge gained over the years in many other organisations. I had a very experienced and wise Board of Directors who shared their tacit and functional expertise with me. In fact, my management style and achievements had been noticed by employers and Human Resource Managers in organisations. After I started my consultancy and training practice, I had many clients. Many of these clients told me they hired me because of how I synthesised theory and practice and managed the achievements we made at the ETF Board. They told me that they recognise me as a man who actually practices what he preaches.

I heard that the new Minister had taken office in his new portfolio and held a press conference. The following Sunday, the Divaina newspaper published an article based on the Minister’s press conference about numerous frauds and wrongdoings at the ETF Board.

I was furious because they were farthest from the truth. In my fury, I picked up my phone, called the Minister directly, and asked whether I could see him now. He agreed. I showed the article and pointed out all the untruths in it. I told him that since I am not a politically appointed person but appointed for my professional competence, such articles would damage my reputation. He mumbled that he had been told about some wrongdoing and was surprised that it was published. Before I could say anything further, he promised to correct the misinformation.

Immediately, he changed the subject and asked me in Sinhala, “Is Aunty in Colombo or at Getamanna?” He was referring to my mother. He would visit Getamanna on and off, and my mother was fond of him. My mother would always speak on behalf of the villages and knew firsthand their requirements. Once, my mother told Mr Mahinda Rajapakse during an election campaign visit that the villagers want electricity rather than jobs.

He had promised, “Aunty, I will somehow give electricity to this village”. When other politicians, on their visits, hear my mother’s request, they explain the electricity master plan and how this village cannot be given electricity soon. As promised, Mahinda Rajapaksa arranged for electricity to be given to our village despite the so-called master plan. Therefore when he suddenly asked about my mother, I could be forgiven for letting my anger dissipate immediately. How could you continue that anger now? After that, I left after a cordial but brief chat. I have learned much from many Ministers I worked with. Still, Mahinda Rajapaksa, being a very shrewd and experienced politician, was, above all, the best.

Since there was no correction in the newspapers as promised, I decided to take matters into my own hands. I telephoned Dr Seevali Ratwatta, Chairman of Upali Newspapers, to tell him my story and asked him to publish my version. I faxed it directly to his private fax machine, and it was published the very next Sunday. Many advised me not to challenge a new government, but since I had no skeletons in the cupboard, I believed what I did was correct.

About two years after I left the ETF Board, I was reappointed as a Board member. I realised that the management was not very transparent and did not disclose some material information to the Board. I picked holes in many board papers and became a nuisance to the management. One such instance occurred when the members’ interest rate was being discussed. I challenged the calculation on the basis that the portfolio’s value diminution was not taken into account. I questioned whether it had been done in previous years and was assured that it had been duly accounted for. I asked that the diminution provided for the last three years be tabled at the next meeting. At that time, the “mark to market” methodology was not in the accounting standards. We were required to provide only for the diminution in the portfolio’s value.

In fact, during my tenure, I challenged this with the Public Enterprises Division, why only diminution was accounted for and not the appreciation of the share value, only to be told that there are many aspects of accountancy that an engineer would not understand. I could not see the logic of it at all. It should be done both ways. Many years later, the rules were changed to “mark to market,” so that all share investments would be marked at market value as at 31 December, thereby giving higher values to those investments that had appreciated. I was elated by this turn of events, which proved that engineers were ahead of the curve compared to accountants.

Coming back to the dispute over diminution, at the next meeting, a board paper was presented stating that no diminution has been provided for the last three years. This was a complete reversal of the earlier position. The management had misled the Board. Adding insult to injury, the board paper continued to say that if they had provided for diminution, they could not have paid a high interest rate. I explained to the Board the seriousness of this statement. Thereafter, I asked whether the Auditor General had commented on the non-provisioning for diminution. Once again, management said no, that no adverse comments were made.

I asked for the Auditor General’s report to be brought to the Board immediately and pointed to the relevant paragraph where the Auditor General clearly states that the profits are overstated due to the non-provision for diminution. By then, the other board members’ faces were red, and some suggested disciplinary action against the concerned officer. I could not resist the temptation and, completely disregarding my training in diplomacy, I blurted out that I would rather take disciplinary action against the Board for their apparent lapse.

At the ETF Board, the term of a director was 2 years, and when the 2-year term was up, I was the only one not reappointed. All the others were. If you rock the boat, you get thrown out. This is why it is essential to have an alert and qualified Board for a State-Owned Enterprise. As they say, “the fish rots from the head”. The Board of Directors is the head.

ETF directorships were coming to me again and again. First, it was as a nominee director of the Employers’ Federation of Ceylon. My role was to protect the funds employers contributed. I was unhappy with some of the Human Resource decisions but chose not to interfere, warning that I would not allow the funds to be misused. At the end of my two years, I opted out. Once again, I was appointed as a nominee Director, but my tenure was short-lived. I was appointed as the Chairman of NDB Bank.

Since the ETF held a substantial number of NDB shares, this affected my independence status. I once again resigned from the ETF Director Board. I have had no connection with the ETF Board since 2013.

The next episode will describe my foray into consultancy and training.

Awardee of the APO Regional Award for promoting Productivity in the Asia Pacific Region

Recipient of the “Order of the Rising Sun, Gold and Silver Rays” from the Government of Japan.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.