Sri Lanka, given its small domestic market, should liberalize the economy more than India  – top Indian Economist

Leading Indian Economist, Montek Singh Ahluwalia shares his views on India’s reforms drive. He was in Sri Lanka to attend the ‘’India Calling” event organised by the Lanka-India Business Association. He was a key member of the team that drove economic reforms in India in 1991 under the P.V. Narasimha Rao Government. He later served as Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission under Prime Minister Manmohan Singh from 2004 to 2014.

QAs far as the reform process which started in India in 1991 where you played a key role, what are the circumstances that led to the introduction of economic reforms?

Well, you know, the immediate trigger was a very serious balance of payments crisis in 1991 — part of a buildup of internal imbalances. The fiscal deficit was growing, but it was triggered by Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990, when oil prices really shot up and the balance of payments deficit became huge.

Domestically, we were going through a period of political unrest. The Congress Party had lost the election and was replaced by a shaky, unstable coalition. That coalition took certain politically expedient measures which weakened its own support.

So, to foreigners, it looked as if the Indian Government was weak and was unlikely to take strong measures. As a result, a lot of money went out, Bank loans were not renewed, etc. In that situation, we suddenly found reserves dropping very sharply — a major crisis.

There was an election, and a new Government came in headed by P. V. Narasimha Rao from the Congress, who brought in Manmohan Singh, a technocrat who had been Governor of the Reserve Bank and a senior civil servant before, as the Finance Minister.

These two decided to use this opportunity not just to manage the crisis but also to bring in a lot of structural reforms that would increase efficiency.

Anyway, they managed the economy extremely well. They brought in the IMF, did some of the obvious things, reduced the fiscal deficit, carried out a devaluation, and later moved to a market-determined exchange rate.

Everybody saw that stability was there. But at the same time, they introduced reforms, got rid of industrial controls, opened up trade policies, opened up to FDI (Foreign Direct Investment), got rid of public sector reservations in certain industries, talked about privatisation but did not do it, and talked about a few other things.

Many of these reforms did actually get started, including reforms of the financial sector and capital markets.

I think we made a pretty good start on many of them — more than I think most people thought we would. Then, of course, after a while, it became more difficult. And this is part of the problem.

Democracy is a process where you keep having to get re-elected. Whoever opposes you, you may win today, but two years later, for some other reason, they might get support elsewhere.

I think what we had was a process of gradualist reform, but serious reform. At the end of three years, you could always say we had not made as much progress as we wanted, but we certainly got a lot of things done. That was the nature of the situation.

The other interesting thing is that although the reform was always controversial when it was happening, we were either lucky or our politicians managed it well. When the Government changed, they did not really reverse the reforms. They found a way of justifying their continuation.

QHow did India manage policy consistency despite the changes of Governments on and off, as a democracy?

Let me say that in China, it is not as if just because it is a one-party system, Deng Xiaoping was automatically obeyed. If you read Fogel’s book on Deng Xiaoping, he will tell you how he had lots of opposition within the party.

He took three to four years to position himself by manoeuvring, sidelining some of these people, getting rid of others. But then, at the end of a certain period, he controlled the Politburo. He did not have to worry about elections.

In India, you may manage your Cabinet, but five years down the road, you have to face another Election. Whoever disagrees with you has an incentive to go to the public and strike back by mobilising public support and affection, or by whatever means are available. That is what democracy is.

The credit for that goes to all Indians, or to the politicians. But it certainly will not go to just a few individuals. This was just a reflection of the fact that Indian politics recognised that this was the way to move forward.

I hope that it is doing that even today. When the BJP was defeated in 2004, the Congress was very critical of the BJP. They took over, and they had slightly different reforms.

They were not anti-private sector, but they talked more about welfare, education, the poor, and so on. They also allowed the private sector to flourish.

The good thing about the private sector is that after a while, you do not have to do anything for them. They grow and invest a lot in the country.

Towards the end of the UPA, the BJP was able to organise, fight back, and so on. That switch from the UPA to the current BJP, with Prime Minister Narendra Modi leading the BJP campaign, was a very hard-fought election with allegations of corruption, this, that, and the other.

The honest truth is that I do not know whether the Government — no Government likes to be told that it is doing the same thing. But I think every Government should appreciate the fact that, collectively, you have conveyed the impression that although you are engaged in a vibrant and competitive democracy, there is an underlying national consensus. You happen to be leading the country at the moment.

You can shape policies one way or another, but you cannot make an about-turn.

You cannot have one person being pro-private sector and the next person coming in and nationalising everything. That would be a disaster.

I think both Governments have recognised the importance of fiscal management. The present Government has done a good job. They have certainly not let the fiscal situation deteriorate. They managed to bring it under control.

QSri Lanka started opening up the economy under the 1977 Government, but India did it much later. However, we are in two different positions today. How do you make any comparison?

That is a good question. I think Sri Lanka did not do enough because, when you say opening up, it was not really an open economy. You relaxed a little bit, but you retained a lot of control.

I think you never clearly gave the signal that we are inviting foreign investment, we are happy with private investment expanding, and we are willing to privatise the economy.

The other thing you have to remember is that we are poorer than Sri Lanka in terms of per capita income, but obviously very large. There is a very large market. So, even if you do not do as much liberalisation, there is still a large market for investors to look at.

Sri Lanka is a much smaller economy. If you have all these constraints, the internal market can never be big enough to attract large investors.

You should have done it. I think if you had done that, you would have gained all the benefits that Vietnam and other countries have gained from the China Plus One strategy.

QGiven Sri Lanka’s strategic location as India’s closest maritime neighbour and its potential role as a gateway to one of the world’s largest economies, how do you view Sri Lanka’s strategic importance?

I can only imagine that it is a positive factor. Look, I cannot put myself in the position of how Sri Lankan would view it because, invariably, everybody is biased by his own position.

But I can certainly tell you, as an Indian, we have no quarrels with Sri Lanka. Unfortunately, we have quarrels with other neighbours, but there is no land dispute with Sri Lanka.

It is further south of the southern tip of India. If you look at the whole of the Indian Ocean, it is not a closed sea. It is not our backyard, nor is it your backyard.

It is an international ocean. But we are quite interested in it. And actually, both Sri Lanka and India have a shared interest in open sea lanes here — no interruption, no politicisation.

I mean, the Chinese have a similar interest, but they have traditionally not been in the Indian Ocean. But from what I hear, they are massively expanding their Navy.

The presence of China in the Indian Ocean will increase. There is no question about it. I have no idea how that will play out.

But from our point of view, since we have problems on the land border with China, we naturally view the expansion of Chinese presence in the Indian Ocean as a bit of a problem.

If the land border creates difficulty, and then there are 20 submarines in the Indian Ocean, we have to think about that also.

We do not have those kinds of problems with Sri Lanka. So, as far as we are concerned, a prosperous Sri Lanka is good for us — that is the bottom line.

My personal view is that we should favour a free trade arrangement with Sri Lanka. Being the larger economy, although not necessarily the richer economy, we should be willing to provide, at least in my view, differential benefits to Sri Lanka, simply to reassure them that we are not trying to overwhelm or dominate a smaller country.

Of course, when countries negotiate, nobody likes differential treatment. They all say, “balanced advantage.” That is fair enough too, I think.

But no doubt, Sri Lanka has a huge vested interest in India succeeding and India remaining open.

It simply means you have a much larger market. As long as you can be assured of an open market for Sri Lankans in India, Sri Lankan businesses can scale up to what is needed to satisfy not just the Sri Lankan market, but also gain a share of the Indian market.

QIn the wake of the economic crisis here in 2022, Sri Lanka also started a reform process. How do you look at it?

I think you started the reforms that were linked to stabilisation, like tax changes. I think Sri Lanka has done an exceptionally good job on stabilisation.

I talked to some people in the IMF personally, and they agree. They say they are very happy with the way the Sri Lankan economy has stabilised. That is a positive factor.

I am not so sure that you did enough on reforms, because stabilisation is the first phase.

Stabilisation is absolutely essential. What stabilisation does is that it enables you to achieve what would be a reasonable growth rate, given your structural constraints.

I do not know what that reasonable growth rate would be, but maybe it is 4% or 5%.

But you know, if you are satisfied with your past steady-state growth rate, and you have taken care of macroeconomic stabilisation, which is good, you have to keep in mind that the global economy is not going to be as favourable as it was over the last 20 years.

So, even maintaining your past steady-state growth rate may prove difficult.

If you want to go beyond that, then you have to take care of structural constraints. So, in my view, reform means the list of things you have to do to relax the structural constraints that prevent you from reaching a higher rate of growth.

Now, what those constraints are is a matter of diagnosis. One person may say this is important; somebody else may say that is important.

I do not know enough about the Sri Lankan economy to say what they are.

But I think I would say that, if somebody asked me, I would ask: what have Sri Lankans themselves identified as the structural constraints that need to be overcome?

Then, let us look at these structural constraints and ask ourselves: has the government identified a really serious structural constraint?

I do not want to give the answer that these are the structural constraints.

For example, do you think that your tariff levels are too high or are they just right? I am assuming that nobody here thinks they are too low, because that would imply that you want to raise them.

If you think they are too high, then you should certainly plan to lower your tariff levels. Many people will say that this will lead to a balance of payments problem. I would say: change the exchange rate.

So, lower the level of protection and adjust the exchange rate. People will say, “Well, you know, we have already depreciated.” That is precisely the problem.

That is a debate you can have. My instinct would be that if tariffs are too high — and my guess is that your tariffs are too high — you should benchmark yourselves against Malaysia, Thailand, and Vietnam.

So, what is a five-year agenda? A five-year agenda could be built around a three-year programme: we are going to lower tariffs by five percentage points, on average, across the board.

Then somebody will ask, “What about those who compete against imports?”

You adjust your exchange rate by the same amount over the same period. That is one example.

If you have a large number of publicly owned companies, you have to ask yourself: do you think public sector management is as efficient as private sector management in a competitive environment?

I am not talking about a protected, crony environment, but a genuinely competitive environment.

My guess is that public sector management is never as efficient, simply because, by its nature, the public sector is not driven solely by efficiency. Its mandate involves many other objectives.

There may be social objectives or other considerations. Most of these objectives can be better achieved through other means.

Very controversial. Even in India, we failed to do that. We did some, but we did not do as much as we said.

The only interesting reforms are the challengeable ones. If a reform is not challengeable, then it has probably already been done.

I raised this point again. I am judging from India. I am kind of assuming that you have similar problems.

More and more people in India are saying that land is a big problem. Land is subject to many constraints.

Most of those constraints are imposed by state governments, not the central government. But nevertheless, whether it is the state government or the central government, if I am a businessman in India, I have to consider the policies and decisions of both levels of government.

But here, land is under the control of the central government, not the state government.

QHow do you see this Free Trade Agreement between Sri Lanka and India?

Well, I am not aware of the details. We are a larger economy than you are.

I realise that I personally think giving Sri Lanka freer access to the Indian market and asking for comparable access for India to Sri Lanka is good for both countries.

And on services, we feel we have a lot of competitive advantage. But if Sri Lanka were to say, “Look, we are willing to do all this, but we cannot do more than this,” then we should find a good agreement and settle on it.

QWhat was your role, sir, during the Manmohan Singh period as advisor?

I was not an advisor during Manmohan Singh’s government in 1991. I was the Commerce Secretary for the first few months.

I was responsible, as the Commerce Secretary, working under P. Chidambaram, who was then the Minister of Commerce.

First, I had to brief him that, before he came, we had been thinking of these reforms. My previous boss there was Subramanian Swamy, also from Tamil Nadu. He agreed that we should do this.

Chidambaram was not an economist, but he had been to management schools. He understood the issue perfectly.

He gave me the go-ahead. Then we worked out all these reforms.

When Manmohan Singh was ready to announce the reforms, I suggested to Chidambaram that we should simultaneously announce the trade reforms.

He agreed. We went to Manmohan Singh. All of this is laid out in my book, *Backstage*.

In those days, this required the approval of both the Finance Minister and the Prime Minister.

So, Chidambaram and Manmohan Singh, accompanied by me, went to Narasimha Rao.

This was just a day before Manmohan Singh was going to announce the withdrawal of the export subsidy because he had devalued the rupee and did not think the subsidy was necessary.

I had argued that since we were doing a lot of trade reform, rather than just announcing the removal of the export subsidy, we should announce the trade reforms together.

Finance Ministry bureaucrats were not in favour of linking all these reforms. They said, “We will examine it on the file.”

But I said, “Look, this is a major announcement you are making. You will lose public attention if you do not announce it now.”

Manmohan Singh also accepted that point of view. They both had to go and see the Prime Minister, and I was with them.

The Prime Minister asked Manmohan Singh, “Have you agreed with him?”

So Narasimha Rao said, “Give me the file,” and he signed it.

It was a remarkable case where, within about six hours, a system that had taken God knows how long to build up got abolished.

To me, it demonstrated that when the political leaders take responsibility, it is not true that the civil service is an obstacle.

After all, Manmohan Singh’s civil servants did not agree, but he simply overruled them.

Well, a few months after this, the Finance Secretary changed. S. P. Shukla was replaced, and Manmohan brought me into the Finance Ministry.

I was also there in the next government, the United Front government, for three years.

The BJP kept me there for one year or eight months or so. Then, I moved to the Planning Commission as a member.

My view on Sri Lanka has always been that, in India’s larger geostrategic interest, we should have good relations with our neighbours.Our neighbours are smaller than us.With Pakistan, we have complicated problems.

When Vajpayee was involved in the first Free Trade Agreement, I was also briefing him in my capacity as Finance Secretary.

I took the view that we should bend over backwards because, in the long run, we should create an impression among India’s smaller neighbours that India is friendly, helpful, and useful.Vajpayee agreed with that view entirely.

But we had narrow-minded people, you know. The Nilgiris tea industry was not in favour of giving free access to Sri Lankan tea in India.

So, we had to agree on a tariff quota: initially, a certain quantity would enter at zero tariff, and beyond that, the tariff would increase.

I thought it was a silly arrangement, but it was a kind of compromise. At least, it brought them on board.