A challenging year ahead

What was mainly reflected in Budget 2026, presented by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, in his capacity as the Minister of Finance, yesterday, in Parliament, was his government’s commitment to keeping the IMF bailout on track. The President spelt out how his government intended to boost investment and carry out reforms essential for economic growth. Salary/wage hikes have been proposed but the government would surely have gone out of its way to do much more for the state and estate workers if not for the economic straitjacket the IMF has put it in. It has had to act with some restraint.

President Dissanayake has set for his government an ambitious goal of achieving a 7% economic growth, in the next few years, driven by investment and productivity-led expansion. This is no doubt a tall order, given the growth forecasts.

The World Bank has projected that the economy will grow by 4.6% in the current year and slow to 3.5% in 2026. It is hoped that the goal set by the government will be attainable; the country will have to resume foreign debt repayment in earnest in 2028, and that task requires a high growth rate, which should be above 6%.

The government’s debt sustainability targets include increasing state revenue as a percentage of GDP while reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio significantly. The government has proposed to increase state revenue to 15.3% of GDP and lower the debt-to-GDP ratio to 87% in 2030.

The projected budget deficit of 5.2% can be considered something positive that signals fiscal consolidation, as the government has claimed. But one of the main criticisms of Budget 2026 is that out of 62 expenditure proposals, which account for a mere 2.4% of government spending, according to the Opposition, only 13 are directly related to development.

The Opposition demanded to know yesterday how the country could achieve its development goals without a substantial increase in capital expenditure. State expenditure has to be kept low to reduce the budget deficit, but that must not be done at the expense of investment in projects that support investment and growth.

The government’s wisdom of planning to recruit as many as 75,000 workers into the state sector stands questioned. The state service is already bursting at the seams, with about one public official per 15 citizens. It has earned notoriety for inefficiency, waste and corruption, and the government’s recruitment policy will only worsen an already bad situation. The NPP has failed to be different from its predecessors which resorted to public sector recruitment for political reasons.

There has been a sensible suggestion that instead of expanding the public service, the government seriously consider reskilling and reassigning excess workers in state institutions as a solution to shortages of human resources elsewhere.

Meanwhile, the IMF programme requires Sri Lanka to restructure quite a few loss-making state enterprises while implementing land and labour reforms, and adjusting tax policies to promote investment. These are politically sensitive issues that the government needs like a hole in the head, with the Provincial Council elections expected late next year. The government is also required to increase electricity tariff, but a Public Utilities Commission intervention has stood in the way of a power tariff hike. However, it may get what it wants, early next year, when the electricity tariffs will be up for revision. It has also proposed to reduce the annual turnover threshold for VAT registration from Rs. 60 million to Rs. 36 million. A positive feature of the revenue enhancing strategy is the proposed streamlining of tax administration.

Overall, the economic outlook may be positive, but it will be far from plain sailing for the NPP government, which is tasked with pushing a major reform package uphill amidst protests and resistance, while fulfilling the aspirations of the public. 2026 is going to be a challenging year for both the government and the public.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.