Country loses US $ 1 billion in fraudulent transactions, certain banks involved

Colombo, June 26 (Daily Mirror) - In a shocking disclosure, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake said in Parliament yesterday that the country had lost as much as US $ 1 billion because of the transfer of a whopping Rs.300 billion ill-gotten cash in terms of Telegraphic Transfers and Advanced Payments for imports. He said that certain banks had been implicated in the fraudulent transactions.

“We have identified certain bank branches. When the manager of one branch was transferred to another, the same frauds had been carried out there,” he said.

He said the country had lost a colossal amount of foreign exchange since 2023.

“Frauds have been committed in rupee terms. When it is transferred, it is an exchange loss,” he said.

“We have arrested a few persons involved in this scam and more will be arrested soon,” he said.

He said that his government had a mandate for rooting out corruption and frauds.

The President also commented on other forms of organized crimes.

“Organized crimes are carried out today by gangs with large networks, unlike in the past. We have seen underworld figures in the past such as Maradankadawela Yakadaya and Marusira with a single weapon. However, the underworld has become sophisticated today,” he said.

The President then briefed the MPs on progress made by the government in fighting organized crimes. He said 3,390 kgs of Heroin, 304 kgs of Cocaine, 5,543 kgs of ICE, 1,543 kgs of Kush, 5,110, 735 narcotic pills, 2,454, 267 narcotic capsules in the recent past. Also, he said some 23 persons who were issued with red warrants have been extradited.

“Few in the security forces have been involved in various organized crimes. These include the Easter Sunday attacks, killing of Sunday Leader Editor Lasantha Wickramatunga, assault of Keith Noyar and Poddala Jayantha. Those institutions and persons who are fighting crimes have become the enemies of the opposition. Those in the intelligence services such as Shani Abeysekera, Ravi Seneviratne and Deputy Solicitor General Dileepa Peiris have become enemies of the opposition today. Is the opposition telling us not to take action against wrong doers? he questioned.

Furthermore, the President said everyone should assist the government to build a civilized society. “Everyone from top to bottom should be civilized. It should begin with Parliament. What we see today is an uncivilized Parliament. We see how opposition MPs try to slaughter the Speaker during Parliament sessions every morning. There should be some kind of control and discipline in the House pertaining to questions raised under standing order 27 (2). I request the legislature to take up the lead in building a civilized society,” he added.