SJB backs anti-drug drive but slams Govt. over Customs scandal and politicised appointments

MP Mujibur Rahman says Govt.’s efforts to eradicate drugs commendable

Alleges President-appointed committee report on releasing 309 containers gathering dust

Reveals plans on extending tenure of Customs DG despite several qualified senior officers in list

Urges to reveal those responsible for clearing the containers and arrest them

Accuses President of not ensuring merit-based public service appointments and appointing politically connected individuals as Secretaries, Ambassadors and senior bureaucrats

Emphasises hypocrisy and double standards of NPP Govt. now fully exposed

The Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) commended the Government’s ongoing anti-drug campaign and said it will support making the country a drug-free nation, but accused President Anura Kumara Disanayake’s administration of politicising State sector appointments and protecting corrupt officials.

Addressing the media at the SJB headquarters, MP Mujibur Rahman said the SJB would fully support the national program to eradicate drugs and rescue the country’s youth from addiction.

“The SJB is not opposing the Government’s efforts to eradicate drugs. It is a good initiative, and we are ready to contribute to it,” he said, questioning the Government on why it was turning a blind eye on the Customs scandal of releasing 309 containers while taking steps to extend the services of the officer who was alleged to have released the containers.

“President Disanayake was preaching to maintain independence, transparency, and the rule of law when he was in the Opposition, but today, he has breached all these when he is in power,” Rahman said, claiming that the alleged release of 309 containers from Customs was done without inspection and the official accused of this had not only escaped investigation but was later appointed Director General (DG) of Customs.

“The President appointed a committee to investigate the incident, but the report has never been released. Instead, the accused was promoted,” Rahman alleged, adding that the Government was suppressing the report because it confirms wrongdoing.

He also warned that despite several qualified senior officers being available, the Government planned to extend the tenure of the present DG of Customs, whose term ends on 4 November, by another six months.

“However, since the current Customs DG performed a great duty for the Government, and did what the Government says, there is a suspicion that the Government is taking steps to extend his service because of his contribution. There is also a suspicion that the Government is extending his service to get more work through him. The Government has made many promises regarding public service, but it seems that the Government is working for political interests,” he said, adding that when the previous Government extended officials’ service, Disanayake condemned it, but now, he is doing the same.

Rahman also questioned the Government’s silence over the release of two drug-laden containers, which were taken into custody by the security forces, and urged to reveal those responsible for clearing them as they had not been arrested.

“The importers were taken into custody, but not the officials who released the containers. Under whose interests or influence did the Government release those containers?” he asked, adding that the Government is providing any explanation in this regard.

Rahman accused the President of abandoning his pledges to ensure merit-based public service appointments, alleging that politically connected individuals were appointed as Secretaries, Ambassadors, and senior bureaucrats.

“The President has completely abandoned his promises to the public service. He pledged to promote merit and end political interference, but today, he appoints friends and loyalists to top posts, betraying the very principles he once preached,” he accused.

He said the Government had made serious pledges to protect the independence and professionalism of the public service before coming to power, and even included those assurances in the policy statement of the National People’s Power (NPP), but had appointed close associates to senior positions, disregarding more qualified officials.

Rahman cited as an example the appointment of a friend of President Disanayake as the President’s Secretary, despite there being experienced senior public officers for the post.

He further revealed that the President had proposed to the Constitutional Council the name of a person who served on the Board of Directors of the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and was employed by a private company, to head the Auditor General’s Department, but the Council had rejected the nomination.

“The President has attempted to fill key positions in the public service with political allies, in direct contradiction to his own policy statement and campaign promises,” Rahman said. “His approach to public sector governance has completely changed after assuming office.”

Rahman also criticised the appointment of ambassadors and secretaries on political grounds.