Contributions of the Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka and its Future Role

The Tea Research Institute (TRI) of Sri Lanka is celebrating its centenary this year.  Hence, this is an appropriate time to review the contribution that the TRI has made to the sustenance of the Sri Lankan tea industry and assess its current and future challenges.

The tea industry of Sri Lanka started in 1867 with the first commercial tea plantation by James Taylor at Loolecondera Estate.  The TRI was started in 1925 as a result of the vision and the initiative of Robert Gordon Coombe, who recognized the need of an institute to provide research-based solutions to field- and processing problems encountered by the expanding tea plantations and to generate new technologies to take the industry forward in an increasingly competitive global market.  During the ensuing 100 years up to today, the Tea Research Institute has performed those primary functions that were expected from it at its inception, with varying degrees of success.  The tea industry, both in Sri Lanka and elsewhere, has evolved during these 100 years, going through several phases and facing a multitude of challenges.  For most of the past 100 years, the TRI of Sri Lanka has been at the forefront of innovations, research-based solutions and advisory services to sustain the Sri Lankan tea industry, enabling it to be economically profitable and globally competitive.  A few major achievements are given below.

There has been a vibrant plant breeding program which has produced more than 70 new cultivars where greater yield potential has been combined with appreciable tolerance of some of the major biotic stresses (diseases and pests) and abiotic stresses (drought).  Latest additions to this are four new cultivars of the TRI 5000 Series, which are recommended to the tea-growing regions at lower elevations (low-country).  These will be launched at the International Tea Symposium on the 10th and 11th of November to mark the centenary of the TRI.  All agronomic practices from soil rehabilitation and crop establishment to crop management and harvesting that are currently practiced by tea growers in Sri Lanka are the result of TRI’s long-term research.  Starting with the famous ‘Eden trial’ (initiated by Dr. T. Eden), which was the first long-term fertilizer experiment to be done anywhere in the world for a perennial crop, the TRI has provided the guidelines for soil fertility management through soil conservation and fertilizer applications.  The innovations and advances in tea processing technology generated by the TRI, most notably the fluid bed dryer, have ensured that Sri Lanka produced a tea of high quality, with a diverse range of unique characteristics.  The TRI has made significant contributions to elucidating the biochemical components of black tea and its health benefits, while developing a diverse range of products such as a tea wine, a carbonated drink and tea extracts for manufacture of chilled beverages.  The Pathology, Entomology and Nematology divisions of the TRI have been at the forefront of tackling some of the major pests and diseases of tea.  A landmark achievement in this regard was the successful control of the pest tea tortrix using a biological agent.  Importantly, the TRI has provided research-based guidelines on the correct use of agrochemicals for pest and disease control so that the consignments of made tea exported from Sri Lanka are within the maximum permissible limits of chemical residues (MRLs) as required by the different importing countries.  Therefore, TRI research has ensured that Sri Lanka produces the cleanest tea to the global market.  The latest contribution from the TRI to ensure market competitiveness of Ceylon Tea is the generation of the scientific data to characterize and formulate the Geographic Indicators (GI) for Ceylon Tea.  It is expected that Ceylon Tea will receive GI certification in the near future.

The TRI has provided benchmarks and guidance for ensuring economic sustainability of the tea production via assessment of costs of different steps of the process, while introducing alternative worker deployment models as a solution for the prevailing labour shortage and outmigration of labour from the tea plantations.  In parallel to its research program, the TRI provides an advisory and extension service which is highly sought after by managers of large plantations as well as smallholders.

Current and future challenges to the tea industry in Sri Lanka

The tea industry occupies a vital niche in the Sri Lankan economy and its socio-cultural landscape.  Currently, it brings in 1.43 billion US Dollars’ worth of foreign exchange revenue and contributes 1 – 2% to the national GDP while making up 51% of the export earnings from agricultural products.  It provides direct employment to 700,000 people which increases to 2.5 million people who depend directly or indirectly on the tea industry.  As such, it is imperative that steps are taken to ensure the sustainability of the tea industry.  This necessitates addressing several critical issues that the industry faces at present and is likely to face in the future.  A few of these are discussed below:

Sri Lanka currently has an aging planting stock in its tea plantations and smallholdings.  The economic lifespan of a vegetatively propagated (VP) tea bush ranges from 25-30 years in the lower elevations (low-country) and 40-60 years in the higher elevations (up-country).  A significant portion of tea bushes in Sri Lanka’s tea plantations have passed their economic lifespan.  The same is true for smallholdings which are mostly concentrated in the low-country.  The large plantations contain an appreciable portion of low-yielding old seedling tea, which is well over 60-80 years old.  This aging planting stock is a major reason for the clear decline in national tea production, which after reaching a peak of 340 million kilograms of made tea in 2013-14, declined to 256 million kilograms in 2023.  This decline was reversed to 262 million kilograms in 2024, and the current government has set an ambitious target of achieving 400 million kilograms in 2030 with an export earnings target of 2.5 billion US Dollars.

Therefore, replanting has become a critically urgent necessity to ensure sustainability in the Sri Lankan tea industry.  Based on the productivity data of 2008, the TRI recommended an annual replanting rate of 2% per year (i.e. 2% of the existing tea area to be replanted every year).  However, according to TRI assessments, the current replanting rate stands at 0.6% per year so that the required rate of replanting to maintain adequate production levels has risen to 3-4% per year.  The high cost of replanting, which currently stands at Rs. 7.4 million per hectare, the 1½ to 2-year period without revenue (due to soil rehabilitation, replanting and bringing the plants to ‘bearing’) and the 8 to 10-year period of return-to-investment are major obstacles to increasing the replanting rate.  Therefore, urgent government intervention, in the form of a well-coordinated subsidy for replanting, is needed to arrest the productivity decline that is currently occurring due to this aging planting stock.  It is worth noting that the substantial investment that the industry currently puts in for fertilizer application and other field operations such as plucking, shade management and pruning does not yield its full benefit in terms of productivity, primarily because of the poor fertilizer response of this aging planting stock.  In this regard, there is a request by the Regional Plantation Companies (RPCs) to extend their current lease agreement, which is due to expire in another 20 years, to ensure that these companies invest adequately on the future development of the tea plantations.

Original building (called Linfield Bungalow) where TRI was started in 1925in the present Pedro Estate in Nuwara Eliy

Tea is a highly labour-intensive crop, especially in Sri Lanka.  A substantial portion of Sri Lanka’s tea is grown on hilly terrain which is not easily amenable to mechanization.  More importantly, the price premium that Ceylon Tea enjoys in the global market is primarily due to its unique quality characteristics that comes partly because of the ‘orthodox’ manufacturing process.  In order to ensure the quality characteristics of orthodox black tea, harvesting the tea shoots at the correct stage of maturity (ideally two leaves and a bud) is essential.  Currently, this is possible only by manual selective harvesting because at any given time, a tea bush grown in Sri Lanka contains several generations of shoots at different stages of maturity.  Therefore, selective harvesting of tea in Sri Lanka remains one of the most labour-intensive operations.  Research conducted by the TRI over the last decade has shown that non-selective machine harvesting incurs a yield reduction of 40% or more in comparison to manual harvesting at a frequency of every seven days (plucking round).  In contrast to tea grown in a tropical climate such as that in Sri Lanka, where a new generation of shoots is initiated weekly throughout the year, tea grown in sub-tropical or temperate climates in North India, Japan and China, which have a dormant period in the winter followed by an even generation of shoots in the spring, are amenable to non-selective machine harvesting.  It is also notable that our competitor countries such as Kenya does not depend as critically on quality as Ceylon Tea and as such can afford to implement non-selective machine harvesting.

Despite the yield reduction that is incurred, most plantations in Sri Lanka have been forced to use non-selective harvesting machines and extended manual plucking rounds because of the severe shortage of labour.  The labour force in the plantation sector, which stood at one million at the time of privatization in 1993, now stands at 100,000, out of which about 85% is in the tea sector.  This is primarily because of the outmigration of labour, especially the younger generation, from the plantations in search of more socially acceptable and financially attractive employment outside the plantation sector and overseas.  Even the smallholder sector is experiencing the shortage of pluckers which has resulted in extended plucking rounds.  Research in the TRI has shown clearly that extended plucking rounds reduce the quality characteristics of made tea because a higher proportion of mature leaves come into the harvest.  The TRI has addressed this critical issue of labour shortage in the tea industry via a two-pronged strategy.

One strategy is to initiate a research program to develop a selective harvesting machine.  In the 1990s, the TRI developed a selective harvesting shear which reduced the labour requirement for plucking while ensuring selectivity and quality without a reduction in yield.  Currently, the TRI is engaged in a collaborative research program with the Arthur C. Clark Centre to develop a selective harvesting machine.  The present prototype that this program has produced achieves a 60% level of selectivity, which needs further improvement, before the machine can be commercialized.

Adoption of alternative worker deployment models (AWDs) is the second strategy that the TRI has proposed to arrest the outmigration of labour from plantations and ensure availability of adequate labour to maintain the plantations with good agricultural practices (GAPs).  The AWDs range from simple systems such as contract labour and cash plucking to revenue sharing and out-grower models, where the estate workers become trusted and respected partners in the venture.  Several regional plantation companies have adopted different variants of AWDs with varying degrees of success.  The TRI has been providing advice on the correct strategies of adopting different AWDs. (To be concluded)

The author (janendrad@gmail.com) acknowledges the information provided by Dr. H.W. Shyamalie, Principal Research Officer and Head of Agricultural Economics Division of the TRI and Dr. Mahasen Ranatunga, Director, Tea Research Institute.  Most ideas and strategies discussed in this article are the result of many fruitful discussions that took place over the last two decades during deliberations of different sub-committees of the TRI and in meetings of the Tea Research Board during the past year. (To be concluded tomorrow)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.