NCE moves to tap diaspora network to expand export market access

Proposed platform to allow aspiring and established exporters in Sri Lanka to engage with overseas Sri Lankans interested in purchasing or promoting local products and services

Yet to disclose markets it would initially cover or how businesses and prospective buyers could participate

Says exporters are also seeking better market intelligence, assistance in identifying overseas buyers, support to participate in international exhibitions, business-matching opportunities and closer engagement with Sri Lankan diplomatic missions

The National Chamber of Exporters of Sri Lanka (NCE) is working to establish a platform connecting Sri Lankans living overseas with the local exporters, as part of efforts to generate new business links and improve access to international markets.

The proposed platform would allow the aspiring and established exporters in Sri Lanka to engage with the overseas Sri Lankans interested in purchasing or promoting the local products and services, the NCE said yesterday.

The NCE did not disclose when the platform would be launched, the markets it would initially cover or how the businesses and prospective buyers could participate.

Sri Lanka’s total export earnings rose 3.3 percent year-on-year to US $ 10.4 billion during the first half of 2026, according to the Central Bank’s latest External Sector Performance report.

Merchandise export earnings increased at a faster pace of 6.3 percent to US $ 6.9 billion, offsetting a decline in services exports. Total earnings from goods and services exports amounted to US $ 1.66 billion in June.

The NCE said the Sri Lankans living overseas already contribute to the export growth through their demand for the local products and services. The proposed platform is expected to formalise these connections and help the exporters identify the buyers and

The NCE members currently export to all major regions, with the United States, United Kingdom, India, Australia, the Maldives and Germany among their leading destinations.

The exporters also serve the emerging markets across Asia, the Middle East, Europe, Africa and Latin America.

The responses from about 275 members to the chamber’s 2024/25 survey showed a combined annual export turnover of US $ 3.07 billion.

While welcoming the first-half export performance, the NCE said sustaining growth would require greater attention to the exporters’ access to finance and export credit, policy consistency, logistics, labour availability and digitalisation of the trade processes.

The exporters are also seeking better market intelligence, assistance in identifying overseas buyers, support to participate in international exhibitions, business-matching opportunities and closer engagement with the Sri Lankan diplomatic missions.

The NCE said it would continue engaging the policymakers on trade agreements and other export-related policies while expanding training programmes to address the shortage of skilled workers faced by the export industries.

It also identified information and communication technology as an area with significant potential to broaden Sri Lanka’s export basket and increase earnings from higher-value services.