Seylan Bank ATMs deliver customer ease with option to withdraw cash in preferred currency mixes

Seylan Bank continues to offer customers control and ease in their daily banking through its wide network of Automated Teller Machines (ATMs), Cash Deposit Machines (CDMs), and Cheque Deposit Kiosks (CDKs). Among the services offered to customers is the ability to select their preferred cash note denominations.

Introduced in 2023, Seylan Bank stands as one of only two banks in Sri Lanka with an improved network of ATMs allowing customers to receive currency in bill mixes of 5000, 1000, 500, and 100. Recognizing the immediate needs of customers when withdrawing the cash mix of their choice, the Bank with a Heart introduced the ability for customers to choose their preferred cash denominations directly from ATMs.

As a customer centric banking solution, the feature eliminates the hassle of inflexible ATM withdrawals. It aims to empower all users with flexibility over their choice of withdrawals and remove the reliance on bank counters and spending time breaking down larger notes. Offering real-time value to clients, the feature reaffirms Seylan Bank’s commitment to leveraging innovation towards providing the best possible customer experiences.

By offering this choice directly through ATMs, Seylan Bank effectively resolves time delays and erases numerous inconveniences. From retailers to taxis and more, Seylan Bank’s varied offering of bill mixes ensures efficacy for customers in satisfying their diverse personal and business needs. The service also adds an extra layer of security and trust to every transaction. As the Bank with a Heart, Seylan Bank’s latest addition to its services continues to provide practical, reliable solutions that blend convenience with customer protection.

HNB Assurance recognized with Merit Award at the Great HR Awards 2025

Aberdeen Holdings’ Group Companies honored at Presidential Environment Awards 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.