Crime and politics

The government is on a campaign to vilify slain Weligama Pradeshiya Sabha (PS) Chairman Lasantha Wickremesekera as an underworld figure in a bid to extenuate its failure to ensure his safety inside the PS premises last week. Its propaganda offensive has sparked a media discussion on the politics-crime nexus. Executive Director of PAFFREL (People’s Action for Free and Fair Elections) Rohana Hettiarachchi has said it is incumbent upon all political parties to conduct thorough background checks on their candidates, and police clearance certificates must be made mandatory for contesting elections.

It is believed that if all political parties subject the lists of their prospective candidates to a rigorous vetting process and eliminate those with criminal records, the question of criminal suspects or convicts being elected to Parliament and other political institutions will not arise. If the problem can be tackled at its source, so much the better, and the country will surely gain, but it is far too complex to be resolved easily. There are neither formal complaints nor police investigations against most politicians involved in criminal activities. They can therefore obtain police clearance certificates. The only way to prevent their election is for the public to act responsibly and make informed decisions when they vote. Unfortunately, many people do not make rational choices; they are swayed by various factors other than the criminal records of candidates. This is not something peculiar to Sri Lanka. Even the US, which has positioned itself as a champion of democratic governance, the rule of law, etc., and claims to be a standard bearer for global democracy, is no exception.

Americans have elected as their President a convicted felon. In May 2024, Donald Trump was found guilty of having illegally influenced the 2016 election through a hush money payment to a porn star. He audaciously condemned the trial, claiming that it had been rigged, and the real verdict would be by the people in Nov. 2024. He was re-elected and subsequently ‘sentenced to an unconditional discharge’. In neighbouring India, 251 of 543 Lok Sabha MPs are facing criminal cases, and of them 17 have been charged with offences that carry jail terms of five or more years.

Researchers have identified several factors that drive voters to elect candidates with criminal records in some countries. Institutional weaknesses and the state incapacity, reflected in poor law enforcement, corruption, bureaucratic lethargy, abuse of power by the political authority are believed to make voters elect ‘strong’ candidates regardless of their criminal past to safeguard their interests. Clientelism is another factor that has helped candidates with criminal records muster enough popular support to win elections. Identity and group loyalty enable politicians to leverage caste, ethnicity, religion and social networks to secure votes despite facing criminal charges or even convictions. Electoral strategies and party dynamics have also stood criminal suspects in good stead in countries like Sri Lanka, where political contests are about patronage rather than policies and principles. Perceived trade-offs also drive people to vote for the candidates they consider capable despite the latter’s past wrongdoings. Economic or political crises that lead to public disillusionment with the mainstream political parties and politicians and a rise in anti-politics prompt the public to vote out of frustration to punish a party or group rather than to reward or endorse others, as was our experience in 2015, 2019/20 and 2024. Independent left-wing leader Catherine Connolly has been elected Ireland’s President. What made her impressive victory possible was her anti-establishment stance, which went down well with the Irish voters who are reportedly fed up with her rivals.

One may recall that a heroin dealer, known as Kudu Lal, was once elected to the Colombo Municipal Council. He fled the country while the police were closing in on him. In July 2020, the Ratnapura High Court sentenced Premalal Jayasekara aka Choka Malli to death over the murder of a UNP supporter in the run-up to the 2015 presidential election. He made headlines by obtaining as many as 104,237 preferential votes, in the general election that followed, entering Parliament and becoming a State Minister. In other words, more than 104,000 voters in the Ratnapura District did not give a tinker’s cuss about Choka Malli’s conviction. Ironically, the victim, a UNP supporter, was gunned down while putting up a stage for Maithripala Sirisena fielded by a UNP-led alliance as its candidate in the 2015 presidential election. In 2020, Sirisena did not scruple to join forces with the SLPP and become a member of the same parliamentary group as Choka Malli. Worse, in 2022, the then President Ranil Wickremesinghe, who leads the UNP, appointed Choka Malli a State Minister! The Court of Appeal acquitted Choka Malli in March 2022, but the Supreme Court has granted leave to proceed with an appeal challenging the Court of Appeal’s decision.

Government MPs and their Opposition counterparts in the current Parliament are often heard calling one another criminals. It is said that only a snake knows the tracks left by another snake. So, we are compelled to consider their claims to be true. Isn’t it naïve to expect such politicians to deny nominations to individuals with criminal records?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.