Republic Of Korea supports WFP’s emergency cash assistance for cyclone-affected families in Sri Lanka

The Ambassador of the Republic of Korea to Sri Lanka Miyon Lee (left) and WFP Country Director Robert Oliver

The United Nations World Food Program (WFP) welcomed a timely contribution of $ 500,000 from the Government of the Republic of Korea to deliver, urgent lifesaving cash assistance to families whose lives and livelihoods were devastated by Cyclone Ditwah in Sri Lanka.

This timely support strengthens the Government of Sri Lanka’s ongoing response and will enable WFP to deliver urgently needed cash transfers to nearly 32,000 people (8,000 households) whose livelihoods, incomes and access to markets have been severely disrupted.

WFP will deliver the cash assistance through established financial service providers using a secure transfer system that ensures assistance reaches people quickly, safely, and transparently. The emergency cash transfers, will allow affected families to purchase food and essential items locally, allowing them to make their own choices, maintain dignity, and meet their most urgent needs during this critical period.

“This support comes at a crucial moment for families who have lost income, food stocks and stability overnight,” said WFP Country Director a.i. in Sri Lanka Robert Olive. “The Republic of Korea’s contribution enables WFP to act fast—helping families put food on the table while standing in solidarity with the Government of Sri Lanka to reach those most at risk.”

Under the Korea-funded program, WFP’s assistance is aligned with national benchmarks for the cost of a basic diet. Each household will receive cash, to cover the cost for a family of four. This support will help families cover urgent food needs as they begin to recover.

“I extend my deepest condolences to the affected families who have lost their loved ones so unexpectedly. I am confident that the country will once again find resilience and strength to stand firm during this challenging time just like in the past”, said Ambassador of the Republic of Korea to Sri Lanka Miyon Lee. She also expressed her sincere appreciation to the World Food Program (WFP), a long-standing partner of Korea in Sri Lanka, for serving as the implementing partner.

WFP extends its sincere appreciation to the Government of the Republic of Korea for its steadfast support to the people of Sri Lanka.