HNB Life wins three Gold Awards

HNB Life PLC manifested its commitment to innovation, operational excellence, and continuous improvement by securing three Gold Awards in the Quality Improvement Project Category at the National Convention on Quality and Productivity 2026, organized by the Sri Lanka Association for the Advancement of Quality and Productivity (SLAAQP).

The National Convention on Quality and Productivity serves as a premier platform for organizations across diverse industries to showcase successful Continuous Improvement (CI), Quality Improvement, Lean, Six Sigma, Kaizen, Productivity, and Operational Excellence initiatives. Participating organizations present projects that address business challenges, implement sustainable solutions, and deliver measurable outcomes that enhance organizational performance.

The three award-winning projects presented by HNB Life highlighted the Company’s ongoing efforts to enhance customer experience, improve operational efficiency, and empower its workforce through technology-driven innovation.

Commenting on the achievement, HNB Life’s Executive Director / Chief Executive Officer, Lasitha Wimalaratne, stated, “Winning three Gold Awards at the National Convention on Quality and Productivity is a testament to our culture of innovation and continuous improvement. At HNB Life, we constantly challenge ourselves to identify opportunities that create meaningful value for our customers, saleforce and employees. These awards reflect the dedication of our teams and I’d like to convey my heartfelt congratulations to all those involved.”

Also sharing his thoughts, EVP / Chief Transformation Officer, Dayan Ranasinghe, said, “Technology plays a pivotal role in transforming the way we serve our customers and empower our people. These award winning projects demonstrate how innovation, process optimization, and digital capabilities can work together to solve business challenges and create tangible impact. We are proud to see our teams being recognized at a national level for their efforts in driving meaningful change across the organization.”

Bourse trading plunges in the wake of continuing US-Iran hostilities

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.