Special exhibition on ‘Buddhist Heritage of India’ at National Vesak Festival 2026

The High Commission of India and the Consulate General of India in Hambantota, in coordination with Midellawela Purana Viharaya, Matara, organised a special photo exhibition titled ‘Buddhist Heritage of India’ as part of the National Vesak Festival 2026.

The exhibition was inaugurated by the President Anura Kumara Disanayaka, accompanied by the High Commissioner of India to Sri Lanka Santosh Jha, during the opening ceremony of the National Vesak Festival.

The event was attended by Chief Incumbent of the Viharaya Ven. Hakmana Gnanawimala Nayaka Thero; Buddhasasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs Minister Dr. Hiniduma Sunil Senevi; Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handunetti, Public Administration, Provincial Councils, and Local Government Minister Prof. Chandana Abeyratne; Women and Child Affairs Minister Saroja Savithri Paulraj; Members of Parliament of Sri Lanka; Governor Southern Province Prof. Susiripala Manawadu, senior government officials and other dignitaries.

The exhibition celebrates India’s rich Buddhist heritage and showcases the spiritual and cultural legacy associated with the life and teachings of Lord Buddha. The exhibition features photographs of sacred Buddhist sites and monuments across India, including places associated with the Lord Buddha’s life, ancient monasteries, stupas, archaeological remains and UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The exhibition will remain open to the public until 2 June.

The exhibition forms part of the continued efforts undertaken by the Government of India, High Commission of India and Indian Consulates in Sri Lanka to promote the unique shared Buddhist heritage between the two countries. Earlier in the year, a special public exposition of the sacred Relics from Devnimori in Gujarat, as announced by Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi during his State visit in April 2025, saw over a million devotees venerate the sacred relics. Previously, sacred relics from Sarnath and Kapilavastu have also been brought for public exposition in Sri Lanka. A special grant of $ 15 million was announced by the Government of India in September 2020 to promote Buddhist ties between the two countries. An important ongoing project under the grant is provision of free electricity to around 9000 Buddhist viharas and pirivenas across the Island through the establishment of a solar power plant. During the April 2025 State visit of Prime Minister of India, he also announced Indian assistance for the Anuradhapura Sacred City Complex Project.