Sri Lanka cannot resist sanctions, but can raise non-aligned policy collectively with others- Joint Opposition

Colombo, Oct. 6 (Daily Mirror) - The Joint Opposition, which recognised that Sri Lanka could not resist sanctions in the event of extending assistance to Iranian vessels, said that it could, however, have articulated its non-aligned policy collectively with others, not alone had it been active with other like-minded international organisations such as the Indian Ocean Conference and the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation.

Delivering remarks at the weekly press conference, its convener, former external affairs minister Prof. G.L. Peiris, said that Sri Lanka had not been active in any of these organisations under the current government.

Currently, around 20 Iranian ships are stranded in international waters off Sri Lanka, with media reports suggesting that they sought assistance from Sri Lanka. The government has also declined to offer any assistance in fear of sanctions by the U.S.

“These Iranian ships are under primary sanctions. Whoever assists them is subject to secondary sanctions. We can't defy those sanctions. But the sanctions per se are against international law. That was so declared explicitly in the third committee at the UN General Assembly last year,” he said.

However, he said that Sri Lanka could have articulated its non-aligned policy, not alone but collectively, had it been active in like-minded organisations.

In this respect, he cited Sri Lanka’s non-participation in the 18th BRICS summit in New Delhi as a missed opportunity. He said the BRICS even established an international bank which is on par with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and Asian Development Bank specifically for emerging markets, taking the combined resources of Russia, China, India, South Africa, Brazil and others.

Also, he said the government did not convene a meeting of the Colombo Security Enclave meant for security in the Indian Ocean.

“Sri Lanka, India, Mauritius and Bangladesh are members. Colombo means we were supposed to take the leadership in it. We didn't convene a meeting. We took no interest,” he said.

Prof. Peiris referred to how Sri Lanka played a leadership role in the non-aligned movement under then Prime Minister the late Sirimavo Bandaranaike who was even invited Indian leader Jawaharlal Nehru and Chinese premier Chou En–lai to play a mediatory role between the two countries.

SL death row prisoner in Saudi Arabia: Only Foreign Ministry should deal, others can voice

Prof. Peiris who commented on the Sri Lankan on death row in Saudi Arabia said that only the Foreign Ministry should deal with it, and otherwise the Opposition Leader calling the governor of the prison there and trying to establish contacts with prisoner Sivarasa Anojan would be serious.

“It must all be handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The responsibility is theirs. Other people can make requests. They can write letters and send petitions. Opposition Members of Parliament, civil society people must not jump in. It must be written in a way that would be understood. Everyone can write to the foreign ministry, but they should not directly address the Saudi authorities. There is a delegation which has gone there. That is fine. That is a delegation representing the government of Sri Lanka. They are retaining it also. That is how it must be done, with the responsibility directly attributed to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,” he said.