Women Empowered Global launches ‘Leadership Lab’

Women Empowered Global (WEG), a network of award‑winning female leaders, corporate CXOs and entrepreneurs, experts and thought leaders dedicated to empowering women from six continents, unveiled the ‘WEG Leadership Lab’, a 24‑week virtual intensive programme, commencing 26 September. The programme is designed exclusively for women leaders who are ready to accelerate their careers, amplify leadership visibility, and drive transformational growth.

The women‑only leadership experience breaks the mould of conventional training, offering a powerful blend of masterclasses, mentorship, and practical leadership tools tailored for rising leaders, managers, and senior professionals. Participants will gain international exposure, sharpen essential skills, and the opportunity to join a vibrant knowledge‑sharing community which fosters confidence, resilience, and impact.

“The WEG Leadership Lab is not for casual growth. It is for women who are serious about transforming their leadership journey,” said Senela Jayasuriya, Founder/CEO, Women Empowered Global. “By combining global expertise with local delivery, we are creating pathways for women across manufacturing, trading, finance, marketing, technology, and management, as entrepreneurs, business owners, fractional executives, or corporate leaders, to thrive and build a more inclusive leadership landscape.”

WEG’s platform facilitates international exposure and career development for professionals and connects more than 4,000 members worldwide. The Leadership Lab builds on WEG’s flagship initiatives, including the 1 Million Women in Power campaign, the African Women Leadership Forum, the Business Hub, and the Global Online Academy. The programme aims to deliver a transformative journey equipping women to step boldly into leadership roles locally and internationally.

Led by Senela Jayasuriya (MBA, UK), an internationally recognized and awarded leadership & empowerment coach and innovation partner, keynote speaker, and certified expert, WEG collaborates with DEI specialists, corporate boards, Business and HR leaders, to design programmes which advance women’s careers, leadership visibility, equity, and inclusion. To date, she has successfully delivered leadership development programmes to more than 20,000 professionals.

Malaysia courts more Sri Lankan travelers as ‘Visit Malaysia 2026’ gathers steam

JKCG Auto and Green EV join forces to build Sri Lanka’s most expansive EV charging network

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.