Strangers at orientation, family by finals- the story of friends at SLIIT

“Bro” is a word you hear frequently at SLIIT. Study halls, elevators, canteens and even corridors echo with lively chatter of students either discussing project work, venting frustrations, debating the latest films or catching their breath from laughing. Almost immediately, ethnic backgrounds, religious beliefs, gender, and place of origin don’t matter when you hear “Bro, send me the notes,” or “Bro, let’s go for the match.”

The traditional idea of a family requires some form of biological relationship, but behind the gates at SLIIT, this is not necessarily the case. In a student body of over 25,000, studying more than 100 different programmes, friend groups frequently develop into something deeper: a sense of belonging that feels like family. Every year on International Day of Families (May 15), we are reminded of the importance of family in creating our identities and these close-knit groups at SLIIT are no different.

For many students, the university experience begins with uncertainty. Being surrounded by unexpected faces and new expectations can be intimidating at first. However, it is during these moments that long-term ties begin to form. A simple introduction during orientation, a shared chuckle during lectures, or teamwork in group projects are frequently the beginnings of meaningful friendships.

SLIIT’s vibrant student life is designed to foster these friendships. From faculty-led events and sports activities to student organizations and societies, students are nudged to collaborate despite their differences. Most importantly, these environments are designed to inspire growth and personal reflection even when faced with conflicting ideas. What results is a strong sense of community and students who have the skill to thrive in challenging situations.

These relationships evolve throughout time. Friends who stood in as study partners, motivators, and emotional support systems stay connected even after they graduate. For many alumni, these friendships are among the most treasured aspects of their academic experience. Even after transitioning into professional employment, these ties remain strong, forming networks of support, collaboration, and continued friendship.

According to Harshana, currently in their third year at SLIIT, it is critical to remember that family is not only defined by where we come from, but also by the ties we form. The friendships created at SLIIT teach that sometimes the strongest families are those we create for ourselves.

Tokyo Cement Group kicks off 2026 leg of ‘Ivuru Rakina Pawuru’ with New Zealand Rugby

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.