“Secret files”: Sinhala middle-class theatre and ethnic reconciliation

“Secret files: a musical melodrama”, a play by Indika Ferdinando, was staged at Elphinstone Theater on October 4th)

With a cast of skilled actors, this play touches on a range of themes (death, disappearances, torture, family secrets, love, betrayals, loyalties, extra-marital affairs, drugs, assassins, financial and political corruption, student unions, whistle-blowers, aging, and elderly care). Yes, there is a lot going on. It’s mostly a Sinhala language play integrated with English expressions, situating the play within a mostly a Sinhala middle class social milieu, where Sinhala and English hybridity is practised in varying degrees.

The story telling with songs, music and dance, mainly in the beginning, gives way to creating the plot, centered around the main character, a businessman, who has arisen from the dead following his murder. He was an owner of a glass and mirror factory, and intends on correcting his past mistakes, by revealing all the secrets.

The main character is believed to be in possession of a briefcase full of secret files about crime and corruption among the political and business elites. These files are the reason for his death, and the person that delivered these files to him has also disappeared.

The secret files in the briefcase are not the only secrets because there are family secrets, between the father, mother, son, daughter, mistress and family friends. There is also an elderly couple, distant relatives that helped the main character hide when he was facing death threats.

The play is about two and half hours long, but the story broken down into smaller, digestible parts, keeps the audience engaged. Each episode is crafted with exaggerated emotions, and interpersonal conflict, revealing contradictions within each character. The daughter character who rejected her boyfriend in an earlier episode for his moral corruption and drug addiction, later makes compromises.

Overall, the play lives up to its subtitle, “a musical melodrama”, with stereotypical and exaggerated characters, exciting events intended to entertain rather than reflect. The set, costumes, lighting, and sound, including the music all contributed to the storytelling with a specific form of pleasure.

It is a specific form of pleasure, troubled pleasures. The Secret Files explore how we are entangled within private and public secrets. These secrets vary in content and nature, as well as, expiration dates. These secrets impact on the ways we navigate an ethical life, which overlap with our notions about self-respect, authenticity and identity.

The story begins with the funeral of the main character, who was murdered and his brother abducted when arriving from the airport. Meanwhile, the Inland Revenue Department has targeted the main character’s company for investigation. And the elites who have attended the funeral are concerned about the existence of some secret files.

While there are many different dimensions to the secrets in this play, the main one related to enforced disappearances gets mixed in with illicit financial flows (linked with tax-evasion, financial crimes, stock market manipulations, and corruption). In the process, the significance of enforced disappearances in lost.

The notion of secret files relates to political violence and illicit financial flows, which are key mechanisms reproducing a militarised authoritarian state form undermining demands for democratic reforms. Reinforcing this militarised (criminal) state are business, military, bureaucratic, religious, media, and professional groups including artists, grounded in seemingly liberal, but entrenched in conservative authoritarian cultures.

The number of missing persons in Sri Lanka is said to be between 60,000 and 100,000 since the late 1980s. There are on-going efforts mostly by elderly women demanding information about their loved ones, in the North and the East as well the South.

Ironically, the same weekend this play was staged in August, next door to the Lionel Wendt, there was an exhibition on enforced disappearances by mostly Tamil and Muslim women’s groups in the North and East, as well as Mannar.

By trivialising the seriousness of some secrets, such as state accountability for enforced disappearances, ‘secret files’ contributes to mystifying structures and cultures of domination as well as impunity.

In effect, the script reflects the collective consciousness of the Sinhala middle-class, for whom the issue of enforced disappearances is less of a priority (given that they occurred over 35 years ago, and some limited compensation has been distributed among the victim, mostly Sinhala families in the South).

But for the Tamil and Muslim communities, the issue of disappearance is still fresh, particularly with the continued presence of the military in their communities and the lack of any substantial efforts towards ethnic reconciliation. Events such as the recent discovery and the exhumation of the mass grave in Chemmani illustrates the significance of disappearances to the Tamil and Muslim communities.

The play also reveals some important secrets related to disappearances within the Sinhala community, such as the disappearance of a student and a solder related to personal interests of the main character. However, this is drowned within coinciding parallel storylines.

In effect, this reflects the “Melodrama of public life” where public discourse and political action are increasingly characterized by heightened emotionality, dramatic conflict, and a focus on spectacle. Meanwhile, some secrets are more important, and more damaging, than others.

There is a line in the play proclaiming “People don’t need the truth, they need comfort, just comfort”, which may express the attitude of the Sinhala middle-class, but not the Tamil and Muslim communities.

Yes, ‘Secret files’ is entertaining, but these are the ‘troubled pleasures’ in a context of secret regarding enforced disappearances.

The script would have benefitted from a more critical approach, deconstructing the collective consciousness of the Sinhala middle-class culture that fails to grasp the significance of ethnic reconciliation (including through theatre productions).

Piprahwa Relics from India welcomed in Europe’s only Buddhist Republic

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.