Problems that crop up when ministers wear two hats

Minister of Agricuture was also Minister of Food – a question of rice imports Agriculture Minister resisted

When a Minister has to handle two Ministries with different mandates and different sets of responsibilities, it is by no means an easy task. There are occasions where responsibilities become mutually contradictory. This happened in the case of the two Ministries of Agriculture and Food. The Ministry of Agriculture was a production oriented Ministry with an emotional culture of achieving self-sufficiency in rice in particular, and stopping imports. The Food Ministry on the other hand had a mandate to maintain predetermined levels of national buffer stocks, supplementing domestic purchases with imports when necessary.

At this time, generally we used to import 100 to 200 thousand metric tons of rice annually. On one particular occasion the Food Commissioner, the Chairman, Paddy Marketing Board and I, supported by other senior officials had carefully analyzed our future rice requirements for the buffer and decided that we needed to import about 100 thousand metric tons in the first instance, catching the brief period, when rice was available in the world market and prices in decline. When I mentioned this to the Minister, he reacted very emotionally. He was speaking in his role as Minister of Agriculture. He had completely forgotten that he was also Minister of Food.

He said that he would not import “a grain of rice;” quoted local paddy production statistics; said that local production was quite sufficient and condemned “an import lobby.” It was stirring and attractive rhetoric but our experience and analysis showed that if we did not import, retail rice prices would go through the “ceiling,” during the traditional period of shortage in the market towards the end of the year and the first two months of the new year. The Minister however was adamant. I was now faced with a dilemma. I could have taken his decision and kept quiet knowing for certain that disaster loomed ahead. I was also aware that when disaster occurred the scapegoat would be the Secretary and not the Minister.

The question often asked is “Didn’t the Secretary advice the Minister properly?” That is how the system works. On the other hand, I could try to do something about it, which meant canvassing the Minister’s decision. This, I felt bad about doing. It smacked of a degree of disloyalty. Having pondered the question, I decided to seek the advice of the Secretary to the Cabinet, Mr. G.V.P. Samarasinghe. He was very senior and respected all round. I also enjoyed a good working relationship with him and even a considerable degree of personal friendship. I was also aware that he and Minister Gamani Jayasuriya were good friends. Therefore, in all respects he was the ideal person to consult.

I sought an appointment and went to see him. I took all the necessary papers, and our analysis along with me. Mr. Samarasinghe looked through everything carefully and said, “My friend, if you don’t import you are going to be in serious trouble.” I asked him “what do I do?” He said, “I will have to find some way to bring this to the attention of the old man, without upsetting anybody.” “The old man,” referred to was the President. Then, he said something very significant. “Gamani Jayasuriya is a friend of mine, and one of the nicest people you could meet. But at the end of the day, don’t forget he is also a politician. If something goes wrong, don’t expect him to take the rap for it. The whole thing will come on you. The old man will not ask the Minister. He will ask you. Then, are you going to say the Minister told you? He will say that Secretaries are there to advice their Ministers properly. And there will be nothing in writing. It will be very awkward for you to ask your Minister to put his order down in writing. So my friend, do you see the mess you could get into?”

I said, that by and large, I understood the troubling implications, and that is why I came to him for advice. In the end Mr. Samarasinghe got the President to raise the issue of buffer stocks in Cabinet, and the Cabinet decided to appoint a Committee of officials Chaired by the Cabinet Secretary, and consisting of the Secretaries to the Ministries of Agriculture and Food, as well as the Food Commissioner and the Chairman, Paddy Marketing Board to review the stock position and make necessary recommendations to Cabinet. The Committee having gone through al I the material afresh, unanimously recommended to import. The Cabinet approved the recommendations of the committee. The matter was thus resolved.

But the whole exercise showed the genuine difficulties involved in taking decisions given certain conditions, and a particular environment. Everybody acts bona fide, but that alone is not enough to reach a correct decision. This is but one of the many problems involved in governance.

Cabinets in Sri Lanka, from time to time take all kinds of weird decisions under the omnibus and expansive agenda item of “Any other business.” I have already referred to the decision to abolish the Ceylon Overseas Service under this item. During this time, I was faced with another one of these, although not of the same magnitude. In a batch of Cabinet decisions which arrived on my table one day, there was one which said that since sugar prices in the world market had “come down significantly,” the Cabinet was of the view that we should buy forward no w and stock up.

The decision referred to a price in pounds sterling as being the prevailing world market price, and directed the Secretary Ministry of Food to place orders immediately to purchase 40 to 50 thousand tons of sugar at this price. This was a staggering decision. Someone who spoke on this subject in Cabinet had make the cardinal mistake of mixing pounds and dollars. The direction was for me to purchase the sugar at so many Pounds Sterling per metric ton, whereas we always bought sugar quoted in dollars by the world’s sugar traders. Giving effect to the Cabinet decision would have meant deliberately paying much more for the sugar.

The decision also had completely ignored the fact that in order to maintain buffer stocks, we place orders well in advance, making some allowance for delays in shipments. If we now ordered such a large quantity, we would have more than a glut which would require extra storage space, as well as the probability of serious deterioration and waste of stocks. I took a copy of the decision and spoke to the Cabinet secretary. He said “Look, I have to record the decision of the Cabinet, and this was the decision. Take it up with your Minister and let him canvas this in Cabinet.”

This is what ultimately happened. I discussed matters with the Minister and gave him a note. The earlier decision was rescinded. I am sure other Secretaries too would have had similar experiences. The entire episode highlights the dangers of Cabinets taking ad hoc decisions without the benefit of formal Cabinet papers.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobigraphy of MDD Pieris) ✍️

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.