ComBank named SL’s Strongest Banking Brand by Brand Finance AAA rating

Sanath Manatunge, Managing Director/CEO of Commercial Bank receives the Strongest Banking Brand plaque from Anuk Wijeyeratne, Managing Director of Brand Finance Lanka

Reflecting its unwavering stability and the enduring trust of customers, Commercial Bank of Ceylon has once again reaffirmed its leadership as Sri Lanka’s Strongest Banking Brand in Brand Finance’s newest ‘100 Most Valuable Brands 2026’ report.

According to the latest rankings published by the world’s leading brand valuation consultancy, Commercial Bankhas also been ranked the 2nd Most Valuable Brand in the country overall, withits brand value computed at Rs. 54.9 billion, representing a significant increase of 17.8 percent over last year’s valuation of Rs. 46.6 billion.

In terms of brand strength, the Bank has achieved a Brand Strength Index (BSI) score of 87 out of 100 and has once again been awarded the prestigious AAA rating by Brand Finance. The Bank’s positions in both brand value and brand strength rankings remain unchanged from the previous year, underscoring the consistency and resilience of its brand performance.

Commenting on the Bank’s performance in the 2026 rankings, Sanath Manatunge, Managing Director/CEO of Commercial Bank said, “Reaffirming our position as the No. 1 bank brand in brand strength with a prestigious AAA rating, alongsidea substantial increase in brand value is a clear reflection of the strength, stability and trust that define Commercial Bank. These rankings reaffirm the enduring confidence placed in the Bank by our stakeholders and highlight the effectiveness of our long-term approach to brand building.”

The strength of Commercial Bank’s brand extends beyond strategic marketing communication, deriving its core value from strong, lasting relationships built across every segment of Sri Lankan society. From top-tier corporate clients to grass-roots communities, this trust is continuously fostered on the ground by the Bank’s dedicated relationship officers, island-wide branch teams, and Agriculture & Micro Finance Unit (AMFU) staff.

Brand Finance evaluates brands based on internationally recognised standards, combining measures of brand value with a comprehensive assessment of brand strength through metrics such as marketing investment, stakeholder equity and business performance.

Present in 27 countries, Brand Finance is the world’s first consultancy certified to provide ISO-compliant brand valuation and evaluation, and the first to produce reports compliant with both ISO 10668 and ISO 20671 standards.Founded in 1996, Brand Finance produces the annual Brand Finance Global 5000 brand valuation database.

The Bank has the highest capital base among all Sri Lankan banks, and is the largest private sector lender in Sri Lanka. Ranked No. 1 in the Business Today Top 40, Commercial Bank is recognised as the most respected and most-awarded bank in Sri Lanka, is a leader in digital innovation and is the country’s first 100 percent carbon-neutral bank.