Rediscovery of Faith

I began studying for GCE (Ordinary Level) in 1964 at ‘Prep Arts’, and my class teacher was Mr. G M Fernando. He was a trained English teacher who loved geography as a hobby. He had an extensive collection of world maps, which he brought from home to the class so that we could study them with him. He was kind and known among students as a clever man from whom they could get advice on any subject, including personal matters.

Mr. Milton taught us history, and I was fascinated to learn modern Ceylon history from him and to read the textbook on ‘Portuguese in Ceylon’ by Rev. Father S G Perera. I began to take notes from textbooks. One of my favorite textbooks was the Sinhala translation of Dudley Stamp’s ‘The World ’. It was a bulky textbook. I told my father to buy me a copy. He gladly bought one for me and wrote my name on the front cover. In a month, I read the entire book and claimed that I knew sufficient geography to pass the geography paper at the final examination.

In 1965, I was promoted to the final-year GCE (O/L) class. My class teacher was Mr. Chrysanthus. He was a strict disciplinarian, but a caring teacher. He wore a white, long-sleeved shirt and a pair of white trousers, accompanied by highly polished black shoes. He came to school in his ‘Hillman’ car, and brought his lunch on a plate wrapped in a large napkin. His wife was a primary school teacher. He taught us catechism, Sinhala, and Civics.

Mr. Chrysanthus once asked who should be the class ‘monitor.’ A monitor is a student assistant to the class teacher. He would bring the attendance register every day from the Director’s Office and return it at the end of the school session. He maintained discipline in the class when a teacher was absent. All my colleagues voted for me, and I was duly appointed the class monitor.

I loved the subjects taught in the class. Geography, civics, Sinhala, English, and arithmetic were my favorite subjects. The teachers were dedicated and wanted us to do well in the final examination. The English teacher was very diligent. He wrote key words from our textbook on the blackboard so that we could memorize them. Once he read an essay I wrote and corrected it heavily.

I went home, rewrote it, and resubmitted it the following day. He eagerly read it and told me that “if I have at least two students like you, my mission as a teacher is more than fulfilled.”

This motivated me to excel in all subjects. My father, who oversaw Advanced Level classes, taught us history. I once asked him why he decided to teach O/L history. He said he loved history and that teaching different courses gave him much pleasure.

At the end of the first-term examination, I got 100% for arithmetic and 75% for Sinhala Literature. My father, who taught me history, thought 45% was a good enough grade for my history paper.

The GCE (O/L) examination was held in December 1965. I got distinctions in Arithmetic and Religious Knowledge, and credit passes for six other subjects.

I sat the Christian Brothers’ Senior Diploma Examination in Religious Knowledge and passed it with a distinction. Brother Cassian was sad that I did not have the vocation to become a priest. He displayed the diploma results on the College Notice Board. Nihal and I were promoted to the Higher School Certificate (HSC) Class. There were four students in the class, including Nihal and me. My father was the class teacher and taught us two subjects – Government and History. Mr. Chrysanthus taught us Pali and Sinhala during the first year. In the final year, my father taught us all four subjects.

My father was a great teacher. Every day, at home, soon after returning from college, he spent about two hours reading textbooks and preparing teaching notes. We did not have electricity at home. He had a small oil lamp with a glass chimney. Early in the morning, he checked the day’s teaching schedule. He never used notes when teaching. His teaching style was to write down several questions on a topic on the blackboard and then give us a summary of the topic. He expected us to tell our views and thoughts on the questions using the summary.

Homework was inevitable, and we had to choose a question from the list he gave us at the beginning of class to write an essay. Once, he told me that he liked my writing style and the way I marshaled the facts to support an argument. It was an enjoyable experience for me to have him as one of my teachers.

My father carried a small briefcase to the college. In the case, he had two pens – one blue and the other red. The red pen was used to ‘correct’ essays and to write comments. Some students spread the rumor that he carried a revolver in the case to protect himself from enemies. Once I checked the briefcase and found no gun, but a book on Latin grammar.

My father began learning Latin to pursue a law degree at Colombo University. He registered as an Ll.B external student at the University and attended weekend tuition classes in Colombo held at Wesley College in Borella. He advised me to do law at the university and to become a criminal lawyer. He thought I could be a good lawyer because I completed my class assignments on time and I was a popular speaker at college events. My father failed twice in his First-in-Law examination. He attempted the test for the third time in 1967 and passed it. But it was too late. He died before the results were published.

Our A/L classroom was by the main thoroughfare that ran through the college premises, connecting Averiwatte Road with the Colombo-Negombo main road. Many girls and their parents used this passage as a ‘shortcut’. There was an ‘order’ from the Brother Director’s Office that boys should not loiter on the passage between 1.30 and 2.30 pm. That was the time girls went home from the convent.

Class teachers did not hesitate to send a boy found in the passage during this time directly to the Director’s Office for a suitable punishment. It was a great challenge for us to be in the passage to tease girls or to talk to them during this ‘prohibited’ hour. One excuse we used was a upset stomach after lunch and the need to use the bathroom. Another excuse was to collect a textbook from a friend in a class far away from our classroom. Thirst and the need to go to the water taps were never accepted as an excuse to leave the class during the prohibited hour.

Our School Parliament was established three years before the establishment of Sri Lanka’s Parliament. The College Parliament was open to all students in grades nine to 12. There was a Prime Minister, Speaker, Cabinet of Ministers, the Leader of the Opposition, and class representatives. All officeholders were elected by secret ballot. I contested and won a seat, and became a ‘regular’ in parliamentary deliberations.

Several teachers attended the sessions as observers. As a junior MP, I took part in a debate on ‘How can we get rid of the Gu Kanda (mountain of feces) from where it is now located?’ The Wattala UC had the bad habit of emptying bowser-loads of fecal matter collected from houses on an elevated land every day between 10 and 11.30 am. As a result, classes closer to the Gu Kanda suffered from a nasty, unbearable stench.

The Parliament passed a resolution to write a letter through the Director to the Chairman of the UC requesting that he relocate the dump elsewhere away from the College. The UC did nothing to relocate the dump. Another topic discussed at the Parliament was the possibility of cultivating some part of the swamp land on the college premises. It began with great enthusiasm, but ultimately, we were unable to tackle the insect attacks on our vegetables. We suspected that virulent insects came from the Gu Kanda.

In my final year at the College (1967), teachers elected me as the Prime Minister of the College Parliament by secret ballot. My opponent was Hilary, a Burgher boy who publicly announced that I got elected because my father was a senior teacher. Brother Director, at the weekly assembly, introduced me as the new Prime Minister and dismissed Hilary’s claim. I appointed a Cabinet of seven members and revealed its work agenda for 1967. Inter-school knowledge competitions, a literary festival, and an agricultural development program were the key items on the agenda.

Nihal continued to be the Speaker, and Gamini, a future Prime Minister, contested and became an MP in 1967. The Parliament hosted a national literary festival and invited several guest speakers. We printed certificates and awarded them to the winners of contests. Several students participated in Radio Ceylon Do You Know and spelling bee competitions. Twice we won competitions.

At the College, I excelled in sports. In 1966, I won the trophy for ‘best junior performance’ at the college sports meet. I broke the college records for putt-short and discus throwing. Although it was a successful year for me, I nearly died in an accident on the college playground. One evening, while practicing how to throw a javelin, a senior boy picked up my javelin and threw it in my direction. The javelin came like an arrow towards me.

I ran away from it, but it landed on my lower back. I fell with excruciating pain. Brother Cassian arranged for an office vehicle to take me to the hospital and sent a junior brother to accompany me. Although I was in pain, I could talk and walk. The Brother took me to a nearby private dispensary to dress the wound first and then took me home to tell my parents what had happened and then to go to the General Hospital in Colombo.

When I went home, my father had already heard the news. He saw me and was very angry and said that he had a premonition that I would get killed. He did not come with me to the hospital. My mother fainted when she saw the large bandage on my back. I could not console her as the vehicle was waiting for me.

I felt terrible, and a strong feeling of guilt engulfed me. My father had warned me to be careful while on the playground. I felt that my disobedience had caused this accident, and I was responsible for the pain it had caused my parents. My father’s style of coping with a difficult situation was to blame my mother. Gamini came with me to the hospital. The doctors at the General Hospital checked the wound, cleaned it, and X-rayed my vital organs. They found that my lungs and kidneys were intact.

The thick sports T-shirt I was wearing in the playground prevented the steel point of the javelin from piercing through flesh. The doctors sutured the wound and allowed me to go home.

Post-recovery was uneventful, and my father took me to a private doctor in Hendala several times. Three weeks later, I contested and won the trophy for ‘junior best performance.’ My father took me to a studio to get a portrait photo of me with sports trophies.

For several months, it bothered me that my father did not accompany me to the hospital. He knew that I was gravely injured and could die from my injury. Instead of accompanying me to the hospital, he tried to hit me and scolded my mother. I thought my father did not love me, although I loved him dearly. My time with him was always my source of enchantment and happiness. But this episode challenged that basic belief and dependence. The episode tormented me for several months.

One day, in an argument with my father, I told him: “I do not think you care for me.” He challenged me to prove my accusation. I told him that he did not come with me to the hospital when I was gravely wounded. I explained to him how miserable I was without him at the hospital. I asked him how he would have felt if I hadn’t accompanied him to the hospital. He told me that he was very sad about my accident. He did not come to the hospital because I did not show any sign of weakness or difficulty in my movements when I came home.

Then I asked him again why he had not come to the hospital. He said, “You should not ask that question because it makes me very sad and unhappy. Yes, I should have come with you to the hospital.” The answer was not very clear, but I gave up arguing with him on this topic when my mother told me how much he sobbed after I went to the General Hospital. The whole family did not have their dinner

and waited for news from the hospital. When I returned at about eleven o’clock at night, everyone was happy, and my mother had reheated the food.

My mother told me that my ‘guardian angel’ saved me, and I believed her. For a year, I was sad for making my parents anxious and worried about my health and future. My mother thought that although the injury on my back was fully healed, in my adult life, I might get some health complications. The trauma of my injury brought back my faith. I realized that I needed external support in the form of a benevolent god or a guardian angel to protect me. This thought of self- protection and self-preservation moved me towards becoming a fully-fledged Catholic again. I went to confession after two years.

I met Father Mique, the French parish priest, and discussed my doubts, worries, and fears with him. He consoled me by saying that occasional loss of faith is quite common and human; what matters is to come back to faith through revelations. He thought my accident was a great revelation, and I should take the signal from it to be a good Catholic. I remember his steel, watery blue eyes through the trellis of the confession box. His breath smelled heavy of cigar smoke. He searched my eyes as if to enter my soul and check the truth of the ‘return’ of a lost son. He told me that I should come for confession at least once a month, and he would like to see me at the church every Sunday.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.