AKD Is Ready

A historical, palpable socio-economic transformation taking shape in the resplendent island of Sri Lanka. People becoming increasingly happy with everything happening around them. Governmental discipline working for the people, coupled with discernible honesty. A miracle is being showcased. It seems something sustainable is getting entrenched, something refreshing, something painfully new.

Finally, the people have empowered and summoned a bunch of talented and competent lapidarists to cut the gem properly and according to the suggested geometry. The phrase “Sri Lanka is a gem” both a literal reference to its world-renowned gem and jewellery industry and a metaphorical description of its rich culture and natural beauty. Sri Lanka has been called the “Island of Gems”. This history has also influenced its cultural heritage.

Everything happening looks good and promising. Sustainable tools of productivity being assiduously incorporated into its anatomy at strategic points. This had never happened before. Even though it’s work in progress, the reality promising and auspicious. Augers well for the country.

A circumspect visitation into the immediate past with the required cognisance reveals clearly antecedents that derailed and destroyed the nation and made it bankrupt. Individuals supposedly with seven brains pushed Mother Lanka into the seventh earth. A bankrupt nation drowning in debt, it’s people collapsing at fuel queues, gas queues, food queues etc. Who betrayed this nation? Your guess good as mine.

The bloke holding center stage today, the cynosure of all eyes, is the man who came to the forefront to take the bull by its horns. The man from Thambuththegama. Anura Kumara Dissanayake, the newly elected president of Sri Lanka. Born in 1968 in the village of Galewela in the Central Province of Sri Lanka. A student from the University of Peradeniya and University of Kelaniya, where he was awarded the bachelor’s degree in science.

The irony of ironies had clearly manifested itself in Sri Lanka. The supposed progeny of Sri Lanka’s contemporary capitalism, those emerging after 1977 with brain and brawn bequeathed a bane. They collectively brought the island nation to a screeching halt or should we say to the knees. A catastrophic plunge. It was the Marxist, Leninist lad from Thambuththegama with his team who had to deliberate, summon their heroics, and negotiate the extreme turbulence to reach some degree of safety. Within a year the bloke had restored confidence and hence normalcy. It was a tremendous achievement even though the country is still not out of the woods. Ironical isn’t it?

In Sri Lanka there was never full blown economic policy consistency, which is an essential prerequisite for rapid growth. Leaders advocated diluted open economic policies. Initially the focus was on development and self-reliance, within a market framework. Then, shifted towards socialist, inward-looking, state-controlled policies. Key programs included nationalisation of foreign-owned plantations, transport, banking, and insurance companies; promotion of import substitution; strict import and exchange controls; and food rationing. Then came the era that ushered in significant economic reforms by abandoning statist policies for a market-oriented, free-enterprise system but huge gaping holes remained. Policies included trade liberalisation, removal of import and foreign exchange controls, emphasis on the private sector as the engine of growth, and the establishment of a free trade zone. The political progenitors that carried out the work since independence are mentioned below.

DS Senanayake (1948-1956), SWRD Bandaranaike & Sirimavo Bandaranaike (1956-1977, with some interruptions), JR Jayewardene (1977-1989), Ranasinghe Premadasa (1989-1993), Chandrika Kumaratunga (1994-2005), Mahinda Rajapaksa (2005-2015), Maithripala Sirisena (2015-2019), Gotabaya Rajapaksa (2019-2022), Ranil Wickremesinghe (2022-2024), Anura Kumara Dissanayake (2024-Present)

The National People’s Power (NPP) government in Sri Lanka, which came to power in September 2024 nothing like previous governments. “Corruption free” is a huge banner and they are living upto it. This mattered a lot as it’s a kind of a catalyst for sustainable growth. The NPP are spearheading several economic programs, primarily focused on fiscal discipline, anti-corruption, and continuing the IMF-backed reforms. Also implementing social welfare initiatives. This is commendable. Others include Fiscal Consolidation and IMF Program, Revenue Mobilization, Anti-Corruption Measures, Debt Management, Private Sector as Engine of Growth, Asset Management, Sector-Specific Initiatives, Regional Integration are key topics that have earned top priority.

Clean Sri Lanka Project. Officially launched in 2025, aims to make Sri Lanka the “cleanest country in the Asian region”. A comprehensive program that involves government bodies, private companies, environmental organisations, and local communities, focusing on several key areas namely: Ethical Commitment, Waste Management, Environmental Sustainability, Urban Greening. This new initiative is distinct from previous “green” policies and is progressing well.

The rule of law issue is turning for the better though sporadic crime continues. The trend nonetheless encouraging. The current government, elected in 2025, has an “historic opportunity” and has made initial pledges and limited progress toward this goal.

Anura Kumara Dissanayake is ready. He can bring prosperity to Sri Lanka. His government is taking steps to address economic issues through actions like strengthening the private sector, reinstating agricultural subsidies and allocating funds to the blue economy, digitisation and more. His administration’s stated priorities include combating corruption, establishing justice, stabilising the economy, and prioritising Sri Lanka’s own interests. Success no doubt will depend on effectively implementing these policies and overcoming challenges such as high poverty levels and geopolitical pressures.