A question of “culling” surplus cattle in govt. farms & handling appeals

At senior official levels, one sometimes gets into positions where choices become difficult because they could violate one’s personal moral or religious code. For instance, refusal to act in some circumstances could cause loss to government. But acting could injure certain principles one follows in life. I was confronted with such a situation when one day out of the hundreds of files that reach me, there was one that read “Culling of animals in government farms.” It all sounded very elegant, except of course that “culling” meant the despatch of surplus animals, cattle in particular to the Abattoir.

A perusal of the file showed that the permission required was to terminate the existence of over 60 head of cattle which were surplus to a farm. Some in the world are deemed to have the power of life and death over people. I did not realize until this particular file reached my table, that I was invested with the power of life or death over animals! Giving the order to “cull” would violate my moral and religious principles. Not giving the order would result in extra costs to the farm and therefore, cause loss to government.

Apart from the basic moral issue, I had certain strong feelings on this subject. For one, I was aware of the extremely crude and cruel way these animals were slaughtered. “Butchering,” seemed to be a comprehensively appropriate term for what took place in our abattoirs. I was also of the view that there should be a better way to resolve issues of profit and loss and bottom lines. No one seemed to have tried for instance to give these animals free or at a nominal rate to villagers. The government gives so many subsidies, even handouts to people. A few cattle won’t make any difference to the overall position.

The problem was, looking into such aspects and obtaining approval for any changes were time and energy consuming. It was much easier to send them to the butcher. For the moment, I decided to “keep the ball in play.” Normally, and right along, I have been used to a system of work where no paper remains on my table for more than two days. In fact, generally on average I clear over 90 per cent of the papers reaching me, on the same day, whatever the number, and however much time it takes. On particularly bad days, which are full of discussions, meetings and tender boards, I have gone on till past 11 p.m. clearing up the papers.

But this particular file, I locked up in my drawer. My intention was to see how I could work out an alternate scheme at leisure. I thought it was both cruel and vulgar for me to sit in an air-conditioned room and condemn other lives to fear, pain and death. I mentioned this to the Minister, one day, in the course of a general conversation on many matters. He felt that it would have been difficult for him to have given such an order either. “What are you going to do?” he asked. “Don’t politicians think that bureaucrats sit on files?” I inquired archly. He laughed. “You handle it,” he said.

So, I sat on the file or rather, I sat on my chair with the file out of sight, in my drawer. After almost two weeks, an officer stood before me scratching his head and inquiring as to what had happened to the “Culling” file. “I have misplaced it,” I replied. This was technically true, because placing it in my drawer meant, “misplacing it,” and I did not say “I must have misplaced it.” All this was sophistry no doubt. But the cattle were alive and well. After some more time had passed, the Ministry had obtained a copy of the letter requesting permission to “Cull.”

This was put up to me in a temporary file. Again, no order. Back came the officer scratching his head. I said “I must find the main file. But to find anything one must first seek.” A considerably perplexed officer left the room trying to understand this oracular statement and probably doubting the Secretary’s sanity. Almost two months later the Minister and I were transferred to the Ministry of Education and Higher Education. The cattle may not have survived my departure. My regret was, that I did not have the time to work out an alternative system.

Among the numerous responsibilities of Secretaries are also disciplinary functions. In the matter of appeals by public officers against punishments meted out to them including dismissal, appeals to the Public Service Commission results in the Commission formally inquiring from the Head of department concerned and the Secretary of the Ministry as to their views on such appeals. The Commission has to be informed as to whether the two authorities concerned agree with the punishment, disagrees, or whether they propose an amended punishment. The ultimate weight would be on the Secretary’s recommendation, for he may disagree with the Head of department.

Secretaries therefore had high appellate authority and it was known that the PSC treated their views with respect. Occasionally, the PSC invited the Secretary personally for a discussion on a difficult case, where they felt they required greater clarification. This procedure of course devolved a great deal of responsibility on a Secretary. But there was a serious flaw in the system. This was the sheer lack of time for an extremely busy Secretary running a large Ministry to devote to reading charge sheets, inquiry notes, and conclusions of inquiring officers in relation to an appeal.

This situation was aggravated by the fact that in a large Ministry with several departments and large staffs you had a considerable number of these files coming up to you. These files were not single files either. All the material pertaining to an inquiry usually came in three or four files tied together in the ubiquitous red tape used in government offices.

I was aware, that many busy Secretaries who were under severe pressure of time normally looked at the head of Department’s recommendation and sent their agreement with it to the PSC. I have myself done this sometimes. But I was not happy with this situation. On reflection I realized that if the Secretary did not seriously give his mind to the appeal, there could be instances where injustices could occur. If he was unable to give his mind to the issue, then the appeals procedure would have failed, because the procedure contemplated the Secretary giving his attention.

On the other hand, with numerous meetings, tender boards, attending to files and correspondence and constantly juggling urgent matters, a Secretary, with the best will in the world could not have given the serious attention that this appeals procedure seemed to have contemplated. Therefore, in order to resolve this dilemma, I instituted my own procedure. I handpicked a number of senior and responsible officers including some at the level of Additional Secretary, briefed them appropriately, gave them guidelines and arranged for disciplinary files to go to one of them in the first instance.

The roster was made so that no one person was put under undue strain. They had to study the files and put up a note to me making their recommendations. I also told them, that I would judiciously test check their recommendations from time to time, by selecting a case at random and reading through all the material myself and seeing whether their recommendations were fair, just and valid.

This arrangement worked very well, and there was now a serious consideration of appeals. On the basis of these recommendations I sometimes recommended to the PSC a variation of the punishment imposed, which in turn sometimes disagreed with the recommendation of a head of department. I also began to test check. I remember vividly one day, where I had an impossible schedule of meetings in Parliament, in the Treasury and elsewhere, so much so that I was able to visit my own Ministry for the first time only at around 8 o’clock in the night. Even at that late hour, I wanted to go and clear up the papers and also see whether there were any urgent matters that had come up. This was all the more important since this was a Friday night.

By about 10 p.m. I had steadily cleared practically all the papers. There remained three files bound in red tape which happened to be papers relating to a disciplinary inquiry. I had not done my test checking for a while and this came to mind. But the time was past 10 p.m. and I had had a very long day. My first thought was that this was no time for it. But second thoughts were to the effect that, at this rate I would never find the time. It was a Friday night. Mercifully, I did not have any official engagements over the coming weekend. Therefore, I thought I wouldn’t be lazy and that I would sample the set of files before me.

As I began reading, I noticed that this was a case of dismissal from service of a labourer from the Department of Animal Production and Health. His offence had been one of barging into a room of a lady research officer and scolding her in rank filth. The offending words were recorded in the charge sheet, and they were pretty strong. As I read on, I discovered that the lady concerned was no pure angel. Tact did not appear to be her forte. But the offense undoubtedly was grave and there was independent collaboration. I then looked at the labourer’s personal record. He was about 50 years old, married and the father of three teenage children.

I next looked at his record in government service. He had over 25 years service, nothing of a disciplinary nature or punishment except two warnings for late attendance. The man has now been dismissed. He would not get even his pension. Looking at the totality of the case and the serious consequences of the punishment on a whole family, I pointed some of this out in a note in the file to one of my Additional Secretaries who had handled this matter and ended up requesting him to see me with the papers.

About five or six days later, when he appeared before me he was quite indignant. “You saw those words used on a lady?” was the question he directed to me. I asked him, “would your response have been different if the same words were uttered to a man? I want your honest view,” I underlined. He was now not so sure. Finally, he said “Perhaps not.” I then said, “One further matter. Today we live in enlightened and democratic times. Men and women are deemed equal in every sense. If this is accepted can a punishment vary if an offense was perpetrated against a woman rather than a man, unless of course, the punishment is for identified heinous offenses against women for which the law has specially provided?”

To this, the reply was, “I had not thought of it in this way.” “I am afraid, if we are equal we are equal for purposes of both the swings and the roundabouts,” I said. I did not however impose a decision. I handed the file back and requested my Additional Secretary to review the whole matter once again. At the end of it our recommendation was, that due to the reasons stated, which we did at some length, the punishment should be varied from one of dismissal to one of docking increments and an unqualified apology to the lady concerned. The Public Service Commission agreed with the recommendations and varied the order of dismissal. I told the Head of department where the lady was working that she too should be given some instructions on how to get on with people.

This episode may appear to be trivial. But to my mind it illustrates the much broader issue of the great importance of the proper functioning of systems. It is because the system worked in this instance that all the pertinent issues were properly weighed and that a poor labourer and his entire family were saved from abject misery. If he was dismissed he would not have known anything but the result, and an order from the PSC was final. At his level, he was not influential. He did not have personal connections. He was another anonymous person among thousands of others. He and his family were saved probably from near starvation because the appropriate and prescribed system worked.

In concluding this case, I have one more observation to make. By this time it was my personal experience that society did not function justly; that quite often different measurements were used to judge the same issue depending on one’s influence and social standing; that often the lowly were punished but that the high and the mighty got away with almost anything, if not everything; and that the influential and the powerful covered up for one another whilst visiting the most stringent punishment on others for what were in range scope and degree, trivialities compared to the levels of misuse and malfeasance that they indulged in.

I was sensitive to the hypocrisy and the unjust social arrangements that prevailed and had made up my mind that I would where possible and feasible keep an eye on punishments meted out to the lowly. This also played a part in my attitude towards the case of this dismissed labourer. There have been many such instances where I have intervened. During a long career many a person would have been unaware that his relative well-being was due to the operation of an invisible hand.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, the autobiography of MDD Pieris) ✍️

Quitting the UNP and battling in the Supreme Court to save our seats

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.