US to open two new military bases in Greenland, sources say

Reuters - The US plans to re-establish a Cold War-era military base in southern Greenland and set up ​another on the east coast, now used by the Danish dog sled patrol, under ‌a deal to be signed with Denmark and Greenland on Tuesday, according to three people familiar with the matter.

The sites are Narsarsuaq, whose population has dwindled to a few dozen people since the US closed its Bluie ​West One military base in the 1950s, and Mestersvig, a military outpost used by ​the Sirius Dog Sled Patrol, a Danish special forces unit, said two of ⁠the people.

Denmark, Greenland and the United States are expected to sign their new agreement at the ​United Nations General Assembly in New York City at 10:30 a.m. ET (1430 GMT) on Tuesday.

The text ​of the agreement has not been made public and the three people familiar with the deal, speaking on condition of anonymity, said its details will not be finalized until it is signed.

The governments of Denmark and Greenland did ​not immediately respond to a request by Reuters for comment.

A White House spokesperson declined to comment ​on the details of the agreement, repeating an earlier statement that its signing on Tuesday would "secure and defend ‌the security ⁠of Greenland and the United States."

Denmark says the agreement puts Arctic security under the watch of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the military defense alliance, rather than leaving it solely to the US and Denmark.

The deal follows months of pressure from US President Donald Trump, who has long said he ​wants the US to ​control Greenland and has ⁠at times refused to rule out military or economic force to acquire the semi-autonomous Danish territory. The idea has been rejected by an overwhelming ​majority of Greenlanders, polling shows.

Trump's threats, which peaked in January, triggered a ​diplomatic crisis ⁠within NATO and pushed Denmark and Greenland into negotiations with Washington aimed at defusing the pressure.

During the Cold War, the US maintained 17 military installations and more than 10,000 personnel in Greenland. Today only Pituffik ⁠Space ​Base remains, with some 150 US military personnel.