Home Lands creates real estate history with over 5,000 units sold

Nalin Herath, Chairman, Home Lands Group, and Angelo Desmond, Home Lands’ 5,000th customer, cutting the celebratory cake in the presence of Harshani Herath, Director, Home Lands Group; Tharushinee Liyanage; Avanthi Caldera, Home Lands’ first customer; Saranga Boralesgamuwa; and Lanka Jayasinghe, Director - Operations & Administration, Home Lands Group

Home Lands Group has created real estate history once again, by crossing the 5,000 unit milestone in sales.

Having sold over 5,000 Resort Apartments and Villas across multiple mega lifestyle development projects, Home Lands continues to lead and define the real estate landscape in Sri Lanka.

In addition to selling over 5,000 units, the company has also delivered over 3,750 units to home owners who placed their trust in Home Lands’ trusted track record of timely delivery. Further 400 units are ready to deliver within this year, reaffirming Home Lands’ proven track record of completing projects on time and timely delivery of units.

Building on the trust earned by Home Lands’ commitment to reaching construction milestones ahead of time and delivering projects on time through financial discipline, innovation, best practices and advanced technology, Home Lands has delivered over 3,750 Resort Apartments and Villas, the highest number of units delivered by any developer in Sri Lanka while having sold over 5,000 units across 24 mega lifestyle development projects, the highest number of unit sales done by a developer in the country.

For over 23 years, Home Lands grew in stature earning the trust of clients both in Sri Lanka and overseas through lifestyle value addition, world class lifestyle development projects and timely delivery. Today the Home Lands Group has become a symbol of trust worldwide renowned for its signature themed lifestyle development projects offering varied and vibrant lifestyle choices and attractive returns in terms of both capital appreciation and rental yield.

Home Lands’ ability to successfully showcase Sri Lankan real estate on the global stage has enabled it to facilitate purchases of its projects in Sri Lanka by an overseas clientele opening up international markets for Sri Lankan real estate.

Home Lands Group’s relentless quest for excellence by continuously raising the bar has made the company achieve impressive unprecedented results with the numbers speaking for themselves. Home Lands’ impressive track record currently stands as 5,000 plus units sold across 24 large scale completed and ongoing projects, 3,750 plus units delivered across completed mega lifestyle projects, 400 more units ready to deliver within this year and 2,850 plus units under construction across 9 futuristic mega lifestyle development projects.

“This significant milestone of crossing the 5,000 unit mark in sales reflects the trust we have earned over the years through dedication, on time delivery,financial discipline, vision, and innovation,” said Nalin Herath, Chairman of Home Lands Group. “We are grateful to all our clients both in Sri Lanka and overseas for placing their trust in us, and are delighted tocelebrate this momentous occasion with our clients.”

Home Lands recently celebrated reaching this significant milestone with customers by hosting cocktails at Gatz Cinnamon Life at City of Dreams, with both Home Lands’ 1st customer, Avanthi Caldera and the 5,000th customer, Angelo Desmond in attendance.

Having sold a massive 5,000 plus units and having delivered an enormous 3,750 plus units Home Lands leads the market by far and continues to trail blaze as Sri Lanka’s Number 1, Most Trusted and Most Innovative Developer, far ahead of others in the industry, further widening the gap between the number 1 and number 2 in the real estate industry. This feat achieved by Home Lands is no ordinary accomplishment and it would take a long time for any other developer to reach.

Home Lands, Sri Lanka’s number one, most trusted and most innovative developer, has been shaping the nation’s real estate landscape with a legacy built on trust, innovation, and excellence. Home Lands is the pioneer of resort-style residential developments in Sri Lanka and continues to redefine modern living, setting new benchmarks in quality, design, and lifestyle. As a fully integrated group of 14 companies, including its own construction arm, Heyraa Construction, holding the highest CS2 grading from CIDA, Home Lands delivers end-to-end solutions across real estate, construction, property management, and lifestyle creation, ensuring uncompromised quality, innovation, and customer satisfaction.

With a growing global presence and offices in Australia, Dubai, and London, Home Lands serves both local and international clients, delivering landmark residential projects across thecountry. Home Lands has earned multiple accolades, including the Best Developer – Sri Lanka award at the PropertyGuru Asia Property Awards for three consecutive years, and in 2025 was honoured with Superbrands status, becoming the only real estate Superbrand in Sri Lanka.