Banking veteran Janakan Selvaratnam joins Serendib Hotels Board

Serendib Hotels PLC has appointed Janakan Selvaratnam to its Board as an Independent Director.

In his career spanning 25 years with Citibank N.A., Sri Lanka, he was Vice President and Head of the Local Corporate Bank & Public Sector for the bank’s Sri Lankan franchise. His exposure has been in managing client portfolios in the corporate, multinational, non-banking financial sector and public sector segments.

He was a member of the bank’s Management Committee, Credit Committee, etc. The scope of his responsibilities included heading businesses in a high-performance-driven culture, strategic and business planning, corporate governance and compliance, and credit and risk management.

Selvaratnam possesses widespread experience working with risk management, legal teams, product groups and regulators at all levels within and outside the country. He holds a Postgraduate Diploma in Business Administration from the University of Wales (Prifysgol Cymru) and a Diploma in Banking from the Institute of Bankers of Sri Lanka. He engages in business development and consultancies in the banking, non-banking financial institutions, insurance brokerage and corporate sectors.

He currently acts as a consultant to Sampath Bank PLC’s Board Credit Committee. His main role is the provision of advisory services on corporate and commercial banking credit risk evaluation and approval, strategy, and credit quality expansion. He is also a Non-Executive Director of Siyapatha Finance PLC. He is the Chairman of the Board Credit Committee and a member of the Board Integrated Risk Management Committee (BIRMC), Corporate Governance Committee and Related Party Transactions Review Committee. In addition, he serves on the Boards of Eden Hotel Lanka PLC and Palm Garden Hotels PLC as an Independent Director.

Selvaratnam commenced his career at Citibank N.A., Sri Lanka, in 1990. He held several key leadership positions, including Head of Sales and Marketing for Commercial Banking and Vice President, Head of Local Corporate Bank and Public Sector at Citibank N.A. until 2015. Subsequently, he served as Consultant on Risk Management to the Board of Directors of Richard Pieris Finance PLC and as Consultant to Foresight Insurance Brokers Ltd.