Seasonal Uvas draw strong buyer interest as broader tea market stays uneven

The Leafy Orthodox teas continued to sell well, notwithstanding some price fluctuations week-on-week. The Orthodox/Rotovane BOP/BOPFs continued to witness a sluggish market, with many teas remaining unsold, due to a lack of suitable bids.

The Ex-Estate offerings totalled 0.89 M/Kgs. The overall quality from the Western and Nuwara Eliya planting districts showed no change, with a greater majority of the offerings comprising of fair average quality teas.

A select range of the Uvas from the Malwatte Valley Region showed improvement in seasonal character, whilst the others showed no significant improvement in quality.

The teas from the Western planting districts – the Best available BOPs, were neglected and mostly unsold, with only a handful of invoices selling at firm to dearer rates, following special inquiry.

The corresponding BOPFs were firm and Rs.20-40 per kilogramme easier. In the Below Best category, the BOPs were firm and up to Rs.50 per kilogramme easier, whilst the corresponding BOPFs declined by Rs.20 per kilogramme and more following quality.

At the lower end of the market, majority of the BOPs remained unsold, due to substantially lower bids, whilst the corresponding BOPFs were irregular and at times declined by up to Rs.50 per kilogramme, where sold.

The Nuwara Eliyas continued to be a concerning feature, as a majority of the offerings remained unsold.

The Uda Pussellawas too continued to be poorly supported, with a majority of the offerings representing the teas at the lower end of the market.

The Uvas – Initial seasonal offerings, which came up for sale this week, met with excellent demand and the prices for the BOP/BOPFs ranged between Rs.2,100-3,000 per kilogramme and Rs.2,200-2,450 per kilogramme, respectively.

The CTCs in the High and Medium Grown category – the availability of the BP1s, were very limited, with hardly any offerings.

The PF1s – Better teas, often sold around last week’s levels, with selective price appreciations, following quality, whilst the poorer sorts were neglected and mostly unsold.

In the Low Grown category, the limited BP1s on offer were irregular, whilst the PF1s, which commenced at marginally lower levels, strengthened by up to Rs.20 per kilogramme for selected invoices towards the close.

The interest from the shippers to the UK and continent continued to be limited, whilst there was improved activity from South Africa. The shippers to Japan and China also appeared to be fairly active. Less interest was seen from the CIS.

The seasonal teas from the Uva planting districts, which were readily absorbed, were competed for by a wider array of buyers, which is encouraging.  The Low Growns totalled approximately 1.9 M/Kgs. The Semi-Leafy, Tippy and Premium categories witnessed fair demand, whilst the Leafy category met with less demand.

In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues, the Select Best and Best BOP1s maintained, whilst the balance together with the bolder varieties appreciated. The Select Best and Best OP1s were firm, whilst the Below Best varieties together with the poorer sorts were irregularly easier. The OPs in general were firm on last levels, whilst the OPAs were easier. The PEK/PEK1s, in general, maintained. In the Tippy catalogue, the high-priced FBOPs were irregular, whilst the balance in general was firm. The well-made FF1s were firm, whilst the cleaner Below Best and cleaner teas at the bottom appreciated.  The balance was firm.

In the Premium catalogue, the Tippy teas in general were firm to selectively dearer.