Nearly 500 killed, over 1,400 still missing due to Nepal floods

RTE - Devastating floods on the Nepal-China border region this week have killed at least 547 people, Nepal's police have said.

Chinese state media earlier confirmed five dead following Wednesday's disaster, taking the total killed to at least 552.

More than 1,400 people are missing of which at least 540 are foreign nationals, including two Irish citizens, who have been named by the Nepalese Tourism Department as 46-year-old Santosh Sahu and 18-year-old Spandan Sahu.

The Department of Foreign Affairs said in a statement that it "continues to closely monitor the situation following serious flooding in Nepal and, together with partners, is working to account for two Irish citizens visiting the area."

A huge torrent of rock, ice, mud and debris cascaded through Himalayan mountain river systems after the collapse, and also led to the formation of a lake where water continued to collect and rise.

The lake's reservoir had topped 2.5 million cubic metres of water, up from the estimated 1.5-2 million cubic metres recorded yesterday, before overflowing into the Bhotekoshi River, authorities in Nepal said.

People ran to higher ground carrying belongings as announcements were made warning them to stay away from the river and police personnel remained on standby with ropes and stretchers.

Rescue workers were also asked to move to safer places along with their equipment.

The risk of the lake bursting prompted all Chinese rescue personnel and vehicles to withdraw and stand by in a safe area, state broadcaster CCTV said. Rescue operations ‌were later resumed "as the risk posed by the upstream dammed lake was deemed manageable", it ⁠said.

Authorities in Nepal stopped rescue operations for 90 minutes but resumed later, an army officer said.

The Nepali military was seeking to reach 100 people trapped in a tunnel of Trishuli 3A hydropower project, an army spokesman told AFP.

"Two helicopters have been dispatched but it is challenging because it is tough to even locate the entry points of the tunnel," he said.

Some 350 workers and residents have been brought to safety from the tunnel, he added, but efforts were ongoing to extract more than 100 people trapped in the same area.

Wednesday's flood ripped through villages and valleys, destroying power stations, roads and bridges along a route that links Kathmandu with Lhasa in Tibet and is popular with trekkers and pilgrims.

In Beijing, China's Politburo met to direct rescue work, state media reported.

Authorities must "scientifically formulate search-and-rescue plans, make every effort to search for missing people from China and abroad," the meeting chaired by President Xi Jinping said, according to state news agency Xinhua.

The meeting said rescue work faced "extremely difficult challenges" and called for stronger monitoring of glacier lakes, landslide risks and barrier lakes, emergency aid to affected areas in Nepal, and closer international disaster cooperation.

Earlier, Nepalese rescue teams used helicopters to search for survivors ‌and drop emergency supplies to thousands cut off in towns and valleys, while emergency services - some using sniffer dogs – recovered dozens of bodies swept down into the plains.

Dibga Tamang was among the last people rescued from Rasuwa yesterday, airlifted along with three others to an army camp in Nuwakot.

"All of our people have gone. They are dead," he said. "I have no one left waiting for me. ⁠Everything and everyone is gone. The end."

While offers of assistance are pouring in, Nepal said it does not need help from other nations in search and rescue missions.

"The offer for help is natural. Our security agencies are doing the search and rescue ‌operation. For now we don't require such help," Lok Bahadur Chhetri, spokesperson for the foreign ministry.

A South Korean rapid response team is already in Kathmandu but has not ⁠been deployed because the Nepali government ‌does not have a plan to accept foreign rescue yet, according to the foreign ministry in Seoul.

The Kathmandu Post reported that India, China, the United States, Britain, Japan, South Korea, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh had asked the government to allow their search-and-rescue teams to assist in the operation.

Chinese rescuers had yet to reach the worst-hit area on the Chinese side of the border, the Gyirong border crossing, by yesterday evening, state media reports indicated, as crews worked to clear debris from the key access road leading to the area.

Dramatic footage on Wednesday showed enormous torrents of muddy water and debris tearing through structures in the border crossing area within seconds and ⁠engulfing people trying to flee.

The tally of missing in Tibet's Gyirong County was 558, Chinese state broadcaster CCTV said yesterday, including 260 foreign nationals. So far, just five people have been confirmed dead on the Chinese side.

China's Premier Li Qiang arrived at the disaster-stricken ⁠site in Gyirong yesterday afternoon, state-run Xinhua news agency said. The visit suggested Beijing was treating the disaster as a matter of the highest national priority.

Around the world, relatives of those missing were desperate for information about their whereabouts.

Sneha Sudhir was one of 10 women whose husbands had set out from Nepal on a trek to Tibet's Mount Kailash when the region was struck by disaster.

The men, all from northern Virginia, are among dozens of Americans missing.

Ms Sudhir said the women were supporting each other and reaching out to officials, politicians and friends and family in the United States and India, hoping for word.

"Everybody is taking turns in shedding their tears, wiping it off and getting back to work," she said.

President Donald Trump said the US had offered support to Nepal.

"Nobody's ever seen anything quite like that, where very powerful, strong, well-built buildings were wiped out like they were toothpicks. It's a terrible thing. We are sending aid and we've spoken to the leadership and we ‌let them know anything they want, they'll have."

The flood "came in suddenly and exploded like a bomb," said survivor Janak Bahadur in Nepal's Devighat.

"The river looked small from a distance but ⁠it suddenly started overflowing and swept ‌through."

The missing foreigners in Nepal came from more than two dozen countries, with nations including India, Australia and South Korea sending aid and rescue teams.

More than 30 British nationals are among hundreds of people missing and feared dead.

Around the world, relatives of those missing were desperate for information about their whereabouts.

Vasanthi Muniandy, whose sister Vennila was part of ⁠a Hindu pilgrimage group from Malaysia, said she had last heard from her after she had crossed into Tibet from Nepal.

"I am totally broken. My sister is very important to me," said Ms Muniandy said.

"I really want her to come back. I don’t ⁠have anyone but her. I just want her to come back home. I want her to be safe."

Ganesh Aryal, the administrator of Chitwan district, said authorities had recovered 103 bodies from the river system in his district, which is about 100km away in the plains from the worst-hit region of Trishuli.

With local hospitals unable to accommodate all the bodies, district authorities were setting up tents and making arrangements for families to claim their dead relatives, he said.

Nepal's Prime Minister Balendra Shah, who visited flood-hit Nuwakot yesterday, said the situation was still challenging.

"All the state agencies are operating at full capacity. Our first priority now is to save life of each citizen, search and rescue of the missing, treat the injured and provide immediate relief to the affected families," he said.

The disaster is a major challenge for Mr Shah's five-month-old government but officials said the country had systems and officials who have experience in handling such tragedies, including the 2015 ‌earthquake that killed nearly 9,000 people.