More solutions …

My Beauty Tips last week on ‘Solutions for Fine Lines and Wrinkles,’ did bring in a lot of comments, with some readers wanting me to highlight a few more solutions.

Massage a small amount of extra virgin olive oil onto your clean face and leave it on overnight to allow deep absorption.

For an enhanced skin-soothing effect, mix olive oil with a few drops of essential oil (like lavender) before application.

Mash half an avocado to create a smooth paste and apply it as a mask on your face and leave it on for 15-20 minutes before rinsing.

Use 02-03 times per week for a consistent boost of hydration and nourishment.

For added hydration, mix the avocado paste with a teaspoon of honey or yoghurt.

Mash a ripe banana into a smooth paste and apply it evenly on your face and leave on for 15-20 minutes before rinsing with lukewarm water.

Use this treatment 02-03 times a week in order to reduce the appearance of fine lines and for soft and supple skin.

You can mix the banana paste with a small amount of yoghurt for an extra moisturising boost, along with probiotic benefits.

Whisk one egg white, until it becomes frothy, and then apply it evenly to face and leave on for 15-20 minutes before rinsing with cool water.

Use it 02-03 times per week to achieve a firmer skin texture.

For an extra tightening effect, combine the egg white with a few drops of lemon juice—but always follow with sunscreen to protect your skin.

Brew a cup of green tea and let it cool completely and then use it as a toner by applying it to your face with a cotton pad.

If possible, use daily for a refreshing boost that will keep your skin youthful and clear.

For added benefits, repurpose the used green tea bags as a cool compress for tired or puffy eyes.

Blend 1/2 cucumber into a smooth paste and mix it with 01 tablespoon yoghurt and apply the mixture to your face and leave it on for 15-20 minutes before rinsing it off with lukewarm water.

Use it 02-03 times per week to keep your skin cool, hydrated, and refreshed.

Chill the mask in the refrigerator for a more invigorating, pore-tightening effect.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.