Overseas visits to drum up foreign assistance for Sri Lanka

“Japanese Buddhist ADB chief would proudly show me the pirith nool tied round his wrist by the monks in Kandy”

PB (Jayasundera) and I next went to Japan which had a special interest in Sri Lanka as the biggest lender to the country at that time. It was much later in time that China came into the picture in a big way under Mahinda Rajapaksa who may be called the “father of unsolicited projects”. We had several meetings with the Ministry of Finance and JAICA. While they were willing to intervene with considerable assistance they raised the inevitable question of proper disbursements and corruption which had plagued JAICA projects in the country.

Instead of arguing about it we agreed that officials from the Japanese Audit department could be housed in our Ministry of Finance to check our disbursements. This saved much haggling and also increased the quantum of aid. I also admired PB’s quick decision making in sticking to the essentials of our claims and focusing on the results. This would often put him in hot water with the usual bureaucratic audit types in the administration who put rules before success and could not match PB’s decision making skills.

There was an interesting diversion during our visit to Japan. Our Ambassador Tilak Amunugama had arranged for us to travel to a Buddhist Temple in Osaka where the officiating monk had agreed to make a substantial donation to our Tsunami Fund. We went by bullet train to Osaka and were driven to the temple in luxury cars. It was then that we realized that this sect or “Nikaya” catered only to millionaires.

It was a well appointed temple building with a large pool stocked with fat “koi” or carp fish. The temple organized an annual nationwide “koi” competition and stocked its pool with the winners. I have never in my life seen such well fed carp even in China where similar big fish are kept close to the kitchen for special orders from the diners’ tables. We were informed that there were several wives of Japanese millionaires whose hobby was rearing carp for such competitions.

The Chief monk made a substantial donation to our Ambassador’s fund. He had visited India for a Buddhist Conference and was fascinated by the multitudes of worshipers. He said however that he was disappointed with Sri Lankan visitors who had promised to send him a bo sapling from Anuradhapura but had not done so. Ambassador Amunugama promised to rectify that omission and one hopes that he, unlike his predecessors, had kept his word.

We on the other hand kept our word and daily greeted the Japanese auditors who occupied a floor of the Finance Ministry and carefully went through the vouchers signed by recipients of Japanese largess. Some years later when the Fukushima tragedy struck Japan I recalled in our Parliament the timely help given by Japan during the Tsunami.

“For over fifty years, as the Leader of the Opposition mentioned, Japan has been helping us in our development efforts. But it is particularly poignant because when the Tsunami struck Sri Lanka in 2004 the first country to come to our assistance was Japan. They gave us an immediate grant of 90 million dollars which was a grand humanitarian gesture. They did not go through the normal parliamentary procedures which are so important in development assistance. They followed it up with a soft loan of another US dollars 90 million. So at this time of tragedy for Japan we should all have our feelings of sadness as well as confidence in the Government and people of Japan who came to our assistance at a difficult time.”

The European Union called for a pledging conference to be held in Paris. The joint chairs of this conference were Minister Hilary Benn of the Department of Overseas Development of the UK and myself representing the countries affected by the Tsunami. By this time Indonesia was treading warily because the Tsunami had devastated East Timor which was fighting for its independence. The Indonesian Government did not want the international community to deal with the rebels.

On the other hand NGOs and Christian organizations which supported East Timor’s claims were using this crisis to advance her claims for autonomy. Thus Sri Lanka, Malaysia and Thailand got most of the attention from the EU. The EU promoted the role of NGOs in relief work and in consultation with the Foreign Office we set up a bureau to register NGOs who desired to help. Lakshman Kadirgamar and I addressed the representatives in the Finance Ministry auditorium and assured them of smooth passage.

Only the Education Department complained that NGOs were deviating from their type plan for school buildings. In consultation with Ashley de Vos I prepared several “type plans” so that builders could have some guidance without hanging about the provincial education offices. The bureaucratic architects in the Housing Ministry raised objections but did not come up with their own designs. There were interminable discussions because Ashley quite rightly had designed some buildings which rested on pillars which could withstand rough waves and at other times act as car parks. Finally we prevailed and some of Ashley’s creations can be still seen enhancing the beauty of the Galle city centre.

As the reconstruction began the question of NGO intervention became an acute one. While well known NGOs like Oxfam and Medicine San Frontiers were tackling problems in an orderly manner there were many mushroom organizations which undertook works which they abandoned halfway or were unable to account for their expenditure. In addition many racketeers, including ground level politicians who wanted to exploit the situation, also got into the act. They even obstructed work if they were not given some personal benefit.

This situation got so bad that our representatives abroad began to complain of undesirables exploiting relief efforts, thereby giving the country a bad name. For instance a huge Buddha statue was built at Peraliya – the site of the railway disaster – after soliciting funds from Japan. But there was no one to maintain it and the disfigured giant statue has now became an eyesore. At the same time we got reports that under the guise of Tsunami relief the LTTE was collecting funds to strengthen its war machine.

After a discussion we decided to set up a division in the Finance Ministry to register NGOs. With much reluctance NGOs fell in line but they were not averse to badmouthing the Government for supervising them. Even today there are some half built schools and community centres which were adopted by such dubious NGOs and abandoned for a variety of reasons including bad financial management. It may Also be stated that most NGO officials and their staff preferred to labour in Sri Lanka because the creature comforts available here were far superior to those in Acheh and other affected regions of Asia.

It was a frequent sight to see these allegedly toiling westerners drinking in the hotel bars of the south. Many of them later became commentators about the ethnic situation here and helped in the propaganda effort of the LTTE. It must be mentioned here that Lakshman Kadirgamar, who was associated with us in the rehabilitation effort, made a valiant effort to rectify such damage and keep the serious donors happy inside our tent.

As a way of keeping the aid picture in positive territory we welcomed a host of leaders from donor countries and the multilateral agencies. The Secretary-General of the UN Kofi Annan was one of the first to arrive. Details of that visit will be given later in this chapter. Ironically one of the first visitors after the LTTE was vanquished in 2009 was Annan’s successor Ban Ki Moon who entered into an agreement with President Mahinda Rajapaksa which many regretted later.

The head of the World Bank Wolfensohn paid special attention to Sri Lanka and even helped in drawing in his friend Bill Clinton into the “friends of Sri Lanka” group which became a source of strength to CBK. Rodrigo De Rato chief of the IMF was the first to allocate substantial funds for our Tsunami relief as described earlier. The head of ADB Tadao Chino came to Sri Lanka with a generous assistance package. We took him to the Dalada Maligawa as he was a devout Buddhist.

Even later when I met him in his office in Manila he would proudly show me the pirith noola which the monks in Kandy had tied on his wrist. Even more than the IMF and WB it was the ADB, which is dominated by Japan, that has helped us in our development effort. Later with the induction of Chinese administrators as deputies of ADB, we were treated with much favour. My regular visits to Manila, where I served on the ADB board, became a way of increasing our foreign resources for development projects.

The Chinese officials who went back to Beijing after a four year stint became our first contacts with the Chinese financial establishment once PRC became a major player in our foreign aid programme. The head of Chinas “Asia Investment Development Bank” (AIDE) Li Jin was a strong supporter of our country.

Among the heads of State the most involved in our Tsunami relief was Bill Clinton who visited Sri Lanka twice and also met a delegation led by CBK in Washington. Magnanimously he came over to World Bank headquarters for a discussion with us. I remember the large number of WB staffers who jam packed the corridors of the building to see President Clinton visit their office. It was a rare visit by a US President and it gave us much kudos.

In one of Clinton’s visits to the affected areas in our south he was accompanied by George Bush senior who was sent by “his boy” Bush Jr. who was then President. Bush also later sent his Secretary of State Colin Powell whom we had met in Jakarta and had become a personal friend of Lakshman Kadirgamar. As mentioned above Japan was at that time the main donor and had a special interest in aiding the rehabilitation effort here.

Former Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda was a long term friend of our country and he kept a watchful eye on their programmes here. Every time I went to Japan I made it a point to meet Fukuda and brief him on the situation here. We worked together when we co-hosted a seminar on population issues for Parliamentarians which was held in the Mount Lavinia Hotel in Colombo. In addition to the state visitors the Leader of the Opposition in Japan Hatoyama also visited partly because of the publicity and partly because he was an alternate leader of his country with Prime Ministerial ambitions.

He met me in office and also toured the affected areas which were benefiting from Japanese assistance. The Japanese were followed by the Nordic countries which at that time were advocates of greater foreign assistance to developing countries. Margot Wallstrom of Sweden on behalf of the EU, Marck Belka PM of Poland and a Minister from Iran were visitors who were welcomed by me in my office in the Ministry of Finance.

Special mention must be made of France which had set up a unit in the President’s Elysee Palace to oversee Tsunami assistance. This unit was managed by young assistants from the President’s secretariat and I interacted with them both here and in Paris. Through these contacts the French later in time established a large trade office in Colombo. A French Ambassadress who was a college mate of CBK, shone among the foreign representatives here and induced many French businessmen and politicians to visit Sri Lanka.

group of hotels of France took over management of the Galadari Hotel and Indo Suez Bank opened a branch in Colombo. However both withdrew after a period of activity for lack of custom due to the global economic recession.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.