Central Expressway and Dream Destinations and Changing the Way of Delivering Projects

Changing the way of delivering projects requires new planning and designing, and implementation approaches to ensure greater efficiency, safety, comfort, affordability, sustainability, transparency, and protection of the environment and people. The cost estimates must be verifiable, procurement must comply with applicable laws, and implementation must be in accordance with the terms of the contract.

The Procurement Guidelines (2024) and the Public Financial Management Act 2024 outline these requirements. The COPE and COPF oversee implementation. They all emphasize cost-effectiveness and value for money (VFM) for taxpayers. Yet, there are more questions about the investments than answers. The way of delivering projects in the transportation sector has not changed.

The revival of suspended and terminated transportation projects and the launch of new ones have been headline news since October 2024. Bandaranaike International Airport’s Terminal 2, Kadawatha-Mirigama section of the Central Expressway, numerous bus terminals, and rail terminals (e.g., Pettah and Maradana), and an ADB-financed rural and national road improvement project are among them. However, details of their procurement, contracting, and implementation processes remain opaque.

According to the Ministry of Transport, Highways, Ports and Civil Aviation website (as of October 4, 2025), physical progress on the 37 km expressway section is 26% and the financial progress is 14% of the Rs. 158 billion contract. While the media reported that the work resumed in September 2025, the Road Development Authority (RDA) calls it an acceleration, claiming 36% physical and 26% financial progress.

The 2025 first-quarter mega project progress report of the Ministry of Finance shows the estimated cost at Rs 176.8 billion, physical progress at 46%, and the delay at six months. By September 2025, the original time for completion of 48 months (by 15 September 2024) has increased to 96 months to end in mid-2028, and the cost has increased by 180% to Rs. 450 billion, according to one newspaper.

In 2017, the current industry minister, as a member of parliament, called for “a forensic audit to reveal the truth behind the awarding of tenders”. He said that “fraud and corruption on the Central Expressway may surpass the Central Bank Bond scam”. Subsequently, as Chairman of the Committee on Public Enterprises, he reported to Parliament that the contract was overvalued. Last week, the Committee of Public Finance questioned the project cost of Rs. 286 billion and the Chinese loan terms. These two committees under successive governments have periodically questioned the cost and highlighted irregularities. However, they have not disclosed the answers to those questions or whether anyone has been held accountable to date.

According to Subsections (1) and (2) of section 44 of the Public Financial Management Act 2024, RDA should have endeavored to deliver the project “on time within the budgetary allocation”, and any changes should have complied with “relevant written laws or guidelines”. However, even after this legislation came into force, the Road Development Authority (RDA) failed to deliver value for money to the taxpayers. Moreover, the politicians who questioned the project’s price tag have approved the price and delivery time increases and borrowed more funds to pay for them. The reasons for RDA not suspending or terminating the contract when the treasury was unable to make the payments to the contractor are yet unknown to the public. Likewise, the bases for the contract variations and the revised contract amount and time-for-completion are not publicly disclosed.

In the railway sector, the Ministry is reportedly spearheading a public-private partnership (PPP) program under the President’s Dream Destinations initiative. It will “transform 100 railway stations to safe, comfortable, and clean spaces”. The most recent call for expressions of interest for station development closed in July 2024, and the transformation of Maradana station was inaugurated on 15 September 2025. However, the outcome of the 2024 competition and the contracts, if any, are not reported anywhere.

Neither the Ministry, Sri Lanka Railways (SLR), Clean Sri Lanka, National Procurement Commission websites, nor the e-GP Portal (last updated in April 2024) has details of the Maradana project or other rail and bus terminal projects. The Dream Destinations coordination office says they are not conventional PPP projects. Instead, the private parties are financing SLR-identified improvements at some of the 100 stations. In return, a plaque with the financier’s information will be placed at the station.

The numerous cost figures and the absence of information on the procurement of new and old projects suggest that accountability and transparency are still being ignored. To change this, the politicians must end the rhetoric and start making informed decisions based on reliable information. Perhaps the industry minister, with his party now in power, can prevent Central Bank-type scams and start delivering projects of value to the taxpayers.

(The author is a professional engineer who served as Professor of Civil Engineering and Head of Transportation Division at Utah State University and Principal Transportation Specialist at ADB for 24 years before retiring in 2017. Since then, he has served as a consultant to ADB, the Water Board in Sri Lanka, and the governments of Papua New Guinea and the Kyrgyz Republic. He is presently a member of the Dispute Board Federation and provides training on FIDIC contract management. He has published 100 transportation-related technical papers and received 1,350 citations.)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.