CIMA President to visit Sri Lanka next week

John Graham FCMA (UK), CGMA, President of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA) and CoChair of the Association of International Certified Professional Accountants (the Association), will visit Sri Lanka from 5 to 9 April 2026 to meet CIMA members, CGMA candidates, business leaders, and stakeholders across the finance and business community.

The visit underscores CIMA’s continued commitment to advancing the development of the finance profession in the country, and driving meaningful change for people, businesses, and the wider economy.

During his visit, John will: Serve as Chief Guest at the CGMA Convocation Ceremony, welcoming newly qualified CGMA designation holders to the profession; Speak at the CXO Forum, a senior-level event which explores key trends impacting the future of business and finance, under the theme “From Recovery to Resilience – The World Is Being Reordered”; Host the CIMA President’s Reception, one of the most important events of the year for the finance and business community in Sri Lanka; and Meet with corporate partners and employers to discuss talent development and workforce readiness, and the future skills needed across finance, business, and the wider economy in Sri Lanka.

John was elected 92nd CIMA President and 10th Co-Chair of the Association of International Certified Professional Accountants, representing AICPA and CIMA, on 18 June 2025. During his presidency, John will focus on demonstrating the value of the management accounting profession, attracting and nurturing new accounting and finance talent, and elevating the experiences of members and candidates. As part of this vision, John will work alongside Association Chair, Lexy Kessler, CPA, CGMA and Association CEO, Mark Koziel, CPA, CGMA to chart a forward-looking path for the profession through the Finance and Accounting 2040: Rise to the Future Together project.

John has spent a large part of his career in the National Health Service (NHS) in the UK, working for a range of NHS organisations, including the Department of Health, and has held Chief Finance Officer and Director of Finance roles for the last sixteen years. He is currently Chief Finance Officer – Tameside and Glossop IC NHS FT & Stockport NHS Foundation Trust and Deputy Chief Executive – Stockport NHS Foundation Trust.

John became an Associate Chartered Management Accountant (ACMA) in 1999 and a Fellow Chartered Management Accountant (FCMA) in 2011. Over the years, he has been an active ambassador and advocate for the Institute. John has held various leadership positions with both the Institute and the Association, with an emphasis on promoting the management accounting profession and enhancing member engagement.