CIABOC DG in JO’s crosshairs

The Joint Opposition (JO) has submitted a petition to the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC), calling for the suspension of CIABOC Director General Ranga Dissanayake and a high-level probe into his allegedly arbitrary and biased conduct. It has claimed that Dissanayake is misusing his position to further the interests of the ruling NPP led by the JVP, and the integrity of the CIABOC investigations has been undermined by his political bias and arbitrary actions.

There are arguments for and against the Opposition’s campaign against the CIABOC DG. Dissanayake himself has denied the allegations against him as baseless, and it is being argued in some quarters that he is in the Opposition’s crosshairs because of the ongoing investigations into corrupt deals under the previous governments. The JO has cited in support of its petition against Dissanayake an affidavit the late SriLankan CEO Kapila Chandrasena submitted to court through his lawyers, claiming that Dissanayake intimidated him.

Allegations against Dissanayake have not been substantiated, but they have adversely impacted the image of the CIABOC. Hence the need for a thorough investigation into the charges contained in the JO’s petition, which is now in the public domain.

There are various allegations against many state officials in key positions. Some officials of the Attorney General’s Department, the police top brass and some secretaries to ministries have also been accused of misusing their authority to advance the government’s political agenda. Some public officials’ partiality and servility to the government in power severely erode public trust in the institutions they represent and make a mockery of the constitutional safeguards in place to ensure their independence. Constitutional provisions alone cannot depoliticise public institutions; state officials in key positions must assert their independence from politicians and be above reproach.

The JVP was instrumental in having the 17th Amendment to the Constitution introduced in 2001, paving the way for the establishment of the Independent Commissions to safeguard the independence of key state institutions vis-a-vis political interference. In 2015, it campaigned really hard to have the 18th Amendment replaced with the 19th Amendment to restore the 17th Amendment in all but name. In 2022, it joined forces with other Opposition parties and civil society groups to do away with the 20th Amendment and bring in the 21st Amendment, which revived the constitutional mechanisms the 19th Amendment had put in place to free the state service from the clutches of politicians.

But today the JVP-led NPP government stands accused of manipulating the Constitutional Council to elevate its loyalists among public officials to key positions in the state service and pressuring officials to toe its line. The Sri Lanka Association of Divisional Secretaries and Assistant Divisional Secretaries has protested against a controversial government decision to provide “Clean Sri Lanka” coordinators, who are said to be JVP cadres, with offices inside Divisional Secretariats. It has written to President Anura Kumara Dissanayake opposing the government move and warning that such deployment of “Clean Sri Lanka” operatives will only undermine the independence of the public service. The JVP/NPP is accused of trying to establish a parallel administration as part of a strategy to perpetuate its hold on power.

It is imperative that the CIABOC conduct a thorough probe into the JO’s allegations against DG Dissanayake, in a transparent manner. That is the only way it can clear its name, if at all. If the allegations at issue go uninvestigated, they will undermine the integrity of the CIABOC, and provide a fresh impetus to the Opposition’s campaign.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.