US / Israel War Of Choice On Iran – Rhetoric, Myths, Fallacies & Implications

Upon watching TV footage & media clips of the US/Israel month-long military onslaught on Iran, I cannot help but resist the urge to share my two-cents on the status-quo for what it’s worth.

Unlike previous warfare – fought with conventional wisdom, and a degree of predictability, restraint and sensitivity (on war-time rules and obligations), this war of attrition bears all the hallmarks of an indiscriminate aggression on Iran with no end-game in sight. It’s abundantly clear, Iran has been unjustly subjected to a massive escalation of bombardment seen never before, unleashing hell on everything in its power – with no mercy for the innocent lives on the ground. Alas, the US/Israel war of attrition has killed scores of people and maimed countless others, causing wide-spread irreparable damage to infrastructure, water, energy, power, health, education, and sports facilities of an unimaginable scale. It’s wholly unacceptable that the US / Israel in their war of choice, not only had the audacity of holding the West Asia region in limbo in its entirety, but have unwittingly dragged the wider world into a quagmire of sorts, almost cutting off countries across the world from critical supplies with no letup. What’s even worse and disgusting still, is the lack of concern and empathy for the vulnerable and those that matter most on the line of fire in Iran and elsewhere. Being a peace-advocate myself, let me dedicate this article to all the war victims and those at the mercy of powers that be (UN and member states) – which is the need of the hour.

It’s inevitable that the American military bases in the Gulf are at significant odds with ground realities, since the US’s seamless military campaign hinges on its air and naval assets in the region – on the whole. Iran on its part has justified its retaliatory attacks on the US bases in the Gulf as acts in self-defense – on the premise that all military bases of “hostile forces” in the region are deemed legitimate targets. In a bizarre turn of events, the indiscriminate massacre of over 100 school children is being investigated for US complicity in the crime, based on satellite imagery of a Tomahawk missile attack on a school in Southern Iran on 28th February. Though the US has initially denied its responsibility for the attack, had conveniently blamed it on an outdated satellite intelligence report. It was a fate-accompli, the Director of the US Department of Counterterrorism, Joe Kent tendered his resignation on 17th March, stating that he no longer wanted to associate himself with an unjust war on Iran at the behest of Israel, citing military intelligence reports to the effect that “Iran posed no imminent threat to the US”, opening a pandora’s box. Director Joe Kent’s resignation was a damning indictment to say the least, exposing US duplicity and double speak on Iran. Given the status-quo, the US can no longer distance itself from its culpability for waging a war of choice against Iran with impunity, based on a false narrative, thus raising more questions than answers. Simply put, the US’s pursuit of war on Iran stands at crossroads, and considered an upfront to the UN Charter and international humanitarian law, casting doubts on the futility of Iran war viz-a-viz the US credibility and its perceived sense of supremacy on the world stage.

Critics argue argue that President Trump’s 15-minute speech on 01st April, by-and-large is nothing but full of bravado and rhetoric on America’s military prowess, inter-alia, to appease an increasingly war-weary American public, justify his unjust war on Iran, and cover-up its failures amidst continuation of war with no clear end-game, lacking clarity, strategy or objectives. Professor Jeffrey Sachs, the world-renowned economist and political analyst, joining a pod-cast on 02nd April, took a direct swipe at President Trump’s veiled threats and insinuations at Iran, and his narrative “will end the war soon, and hit Iran extremely hard and take it to stone-age where it belongs”, alluding it to an affront to the UN Charter and its principles.

Meanwhile Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian in an open letter to the American public, said “the Iranian people harbor no enmity toward other nations, including the people of America, Europe, or neighboring countries, and that “Iran has never, in its modern history, chosen the path of aggression, expansion, colonialism, or domination”.

In June 2025, US / Israel launched military strikes on Iran and claimed that its nuclear program was obliterated. Months later, the US alleged that Iran was attempting to enrich Uranium, despite the latter’s denial that its nuclear program was for peaceful purposes. Prejudiced by their apprehensions, US / Israel launched fresh air strikes on Iran, aimed at restricting its nuclear ambitions. Iran retaliated, threatening to block the Straits of Hormuz, which literally remains closed for its adversaries for nearly a month. The US, desperate to ensure safe passage for vessels through the straits, is scrambling to reopen the straits for cargo ships carrying oil, gas and fertilizer – with no breakthrough in sight. Ironically, President Trump’s recent remarks caused significant uproar among his European / NATO allies, calling them “cowards” for their refusal to help secure the Strait of Hormuz, exacerbating the already strained US-EU relations to a new low.

President Trump’s 2nd term policy dispensations – “Make America Great Again” (MAGA) and “America First” appeared to be at odds with the administration’s overarching policy narratives and stated objectives, thus rendering them virtually untenable on the ground. Trump’s pre-election rhetoric that he would pursue no wars during his second term had come a cropper. On the contrary, Trump’s hawkish military manipulations have been questioned and decried by his own Republican party-backed MAGA movement, casting aspersions on his authoritarian leadership. In essence, America which prides itself as the undisputed global power in all but name, literally has put its credibility on the line. Alas, Trump’s approval ratings have hit record low (36%) primarily driven by the Iran war, spiraling cost of living and rising inflation.  As such, what’s at stake for Trump is not merely a question of placating an increasingly hostile domestic audience, but rather positioning America’s strategic interests abroad in the face of ever-changing / evolving ground realities.

There is an intense bipartisan political discourse on Trump’s war of choice on Iran. The ensuing political backlash, and Trump’s attacks on the judiciary, constitution and media, albeit run the risk of undermining democracy and the rule of law. Broadly speaking, the current administration is being rebuked for being indifferent and insensitive to public outcry, compounded by its interventionist foreign policy. To make matters worse, the Trump government is at odds with voter apathy, casting doubts on the prospects of the Republican party’s success in mid-term elections in November 2026. The much anticipated “No Kings” protest was held on 28th March which is a widespread, peaceful movement opposing the authoritarian actions and policies of the Trump administration, asserting that power belongs to the people rather than a “tyrant” or “king”. Millions of people rallied across the US targeting anti-Trump policies such as  Iran war, civil rights, immigration enforcement, the Iran war, and federal policies, in show of anti-Trump activism and solidarity.

President Anura Kumaara Dissanayake (AKD) was full of praise for walking a tightrope and playing the cards right, sans succumbing to external powers of influence at a time of unprecedented global crises impacting countries across the globe. When the Iranian ship IRIS Dena was sunk in Sri Lanka’s EEZ on 04th March, AKD acted steadfastly for the timely rescue of over 30 Iranian sailors from the brink of death on humanitarian grounds. Besides IRIS Dena, AKD was also praised for his warmth and generosity in aid of another group of Iranian sailors aboard IRIS Bushehr in a spirit of goodwill.

Given its abysmal failure as the world’s apex body, it’s time to call for the UN’s overhaul and restructuring. It’s certainly a pity, the UN simply has done nothing to stop the appalling carnage and bloodletting in Iran, Lebanon, Palestine and Ukraine. Its deafening silence in the face of such a defining moment defies the logic of its legitimacy and credibility. The incumbent UNSG is far from competent in leading the UN and rising up to present-day challenges, exigencies and predicaments, albeit unworthy of the trust and confidence reposed on him. The critics were aghast, the UN had not even tried, nor had the moral high grounds to neither condemn the US, nor Israel for their unjust war on Iran and the lives lost at the least, let alone calling for a ceasefire for what it’s worth, which is routine in diplomatic parlance in the midst of such challenging times.

My previous write-up titled “Whither UN, Multilateralism, Diplomacy : Why Do They Matter More Than Ever“

Suffice it to say, President Trump’s rhetoric and tactics stand in contrast to those of his predecessors. The following items (A,B,C) reflect on the Trump Administration’s faux-pas – doing the rounds in media viz-a-viz at the center of controversy, impacting the US’s geo-political and strategic interests abroad.

President Trump – who often portrays himself as if virtually at the helm of shaping global affairs, has come under intense criticism over his strong-arm posturing on a plethora of contentious issues – impacting the geo-political landscape. Noteworthy among them include, alleged military maneuvering in Venezuela and President Maduro’s capture and taking him a prisoner, unilateral economic coercion on Cuba, threatening Europe and NATO over Greenland, bombardment of Iran with no clear justification, and murder of Iranian leaders, imposition of trade tariffs on countries across the board, US’s withdrawal from a host of UN agencies citing institutional & financial irregularities.

The administration has shown significant divergence from UN obligations and downplayed the role of UN and multilateral instruments. President Trump is on record having made veiled insinuations on multilateralism and diplomacy at the expense of creating conflicts of interests and discord amongst member countries. A case in point is the administration’s lackadaisical approach towards the UN and its withdrawal from UN affiliated bodies and treaty obligations such as WHO, COP26, UNHRC, to name a few. Critics argue that the US’s perceived prejudice to the ruled-based order, has  weakened the UN’s overall ability and commitment in addressing global crises, such as pandemics, climate change, regional conflicts etc.

The US-EU relations are mired by mistrust and disagreement – stemming from divergence of opinion and misunderstanding on issues of geo-political concern, including US tariff, EU defense spending, Russia-Ukraine war. In hindsight, Trump’s veiled intimidations forced Venezuela and Cuba into submission and coercion, much to the ire of the UN and its member states. While his predecessors advocated a proactive US – EU engagement and partnership, President Trump has been critical of the EU’s stand on a number of issues, including Greenland, Iran war, opening the Straits of Hormuz etc.

Israel’s military action against Iran, Lebanon, Palestine and like-minded countries have set a dangerous precedent, placing the entirety of the ME region into submission. Israel is blamed for the alleged killing of over 50,000 Palestinians including scores of children with impunity, with scant regard for the UN Charter and international humanitarian law since 2023 – likened to a genocide and a crime against humanity by human rights advocates. Israel is also accused of targeting civilians indiscriminately, as condemned by human rights activists.  Similarly, Israel’s ruthless military onslaught against Iran with no justification, is a matter of utmost concern at a time when the international community has repeatedly called upon the US and Israel to cease all hostilities against Iran and return to diplomacy.

Iran has shown the world what it takes to confront its aggressors with will-power and courage. Iran’s defiance against such a formidable joint US and Israel onslaught and fire power, indeed is nothing but a “game changer” in all but name. Iran has proven its military prowess and strategic maneuverability against the power of the mighty. Its ability to continue, defend and sustain a high intensity war at will – without submission, speaks for itself. It was a fate-accompli, the US/Israel joint crusade to subdue Iran and claim a quick fix and victory, has indeed backfired with no end-game and exit-strategy in sight, in the face of Iran’s defiant posture.

It’s obvious, the geo-political landscape in its entirety, is in transition. At the minimum, EU / NATO are on the same page, and no longer heeding the US rhetoric / demands.  The West Asia, ME and Gulf countries are tired of long years of US / Israel brinkmanship – having endured their share of woes and ill-will. BRICKs on their part are seen pulling their strings together. Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa are essentially working to put their house in order after years of quagmire. At last, China and India, are seemingly in consort with one-another, and heading on a path cut out for them with their future destiny being assured and solidified. Canada has found new partners in Asia to work with, breaking barriers in new vistas of opportunity. Africa too has risen to challenges and made headway as a continent with a sense of spirit, unity and purpose – and stands stronger than ever. The countries in Latin America and the Caribbean ought to forget their past acrimonies, and make up their minds in pursuit of a shared destiny, vision and prosperity.

The war on Iran has impacted almost every nation on earth, stemming from its negative consequences of spiraling cost of fuel, food and cost of living, rising inflation, market volatility, strain on exports & imports, livelihood and well-being of millions of people across the globe. There has never been a time than today when humanity is facing such an imperil and grave danger due to heinous conduct of nation states hell-bent on unleashing genocidal acts of terror with sheer brutality and vengeance. Let’s pray and hope that there never will be yet another war of attrition and decimation akin to the war of aggression waged by the US/Israel against Iran and elsewhere. By all counts, the war on Iran is at stalemate with neither side appearing to be winning or losing, nor backing down at the least.  This essentially provides a beacon of hope, and reasons to be optimistic. It’s time to chart a new course, building upon mutual trust, understanding and partnership with consensus. Simply put,  it is all the more of a new world order, for the sake of a secure, peaceful and stable world for all, in the name of humanity and kindness.

“Mankind must put an end to war before war puts an end to mankind” – John F. Kennedy

*The writer is a retired Ambassador and Foreign Ministry Spokesman. He can be reached at schandrad@hotmail.com