Janashakthi Finance appoints Sithambaram Sri Ganendran as CEO

Janashakthi Finance PLC, formerly known as Orient Finance PLC and a subsidiary of JXG (Janashakthi Group), announces the appointment of Sithambaram Sri Ganendran as the Chief Executive Officer.

Sri Ganendran, who has held the position of Chief Operating Officer since September 2024, stepped in as Acting Chief Executive Officer during the past four months.

He brings with him almost 27 years of extensive experience in banking. Throughout his extensive career, he has held senior management roles in multiple local and international banks, where he acquired in-depth knowledge in operations, branch banking (across retail and SME sectors), operational risk, business continuity management, business integration, process reengineering, operational excellence, sales governance and credit card operations. He holds a plethora of qualifications including an MBA from American City University. He is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA) in the United Kingdom, and an Associate Member of the Chartered Institute of Securities and Investments (CISI), and a member of the Association of Professional Bankers of Sri Lanka.

Rajendra Theagarajah, Chairman of Janashakthi Finance PLC, said, “We are delighted to welcome Sithambaram Sri Ganendran to this important leadership role at a pivotal moment in our journey. His wealth of experience, proven track record, and people-focused leadership style make him well suited to strengthen and guide Janashakthi Finance, ensuring efficient continuity in all ongoing operations.”

The appointment of Sri Ganendran as Chief Executive Officer, reinforces Janashakthi Finance’s deep commitment to seamless operations and growth. It also underscores its dedication to vision of delivering trusted financial solutions, while continuously exploring opportunities for innovation and expansion to serve its customers and communities more efficiently.

Digital Marketing Association of Sri Lanka reviews performance and unveils Strategic Roadmap for 2026

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.