Dolly Parton, country music icon and ‘Jolene’ singer, dies at 80

CNN - Dolly Parton, who rose from humble beginnings to the greatest heights of American music and became one of the country’s most philanthropic, unifying and beloved stars, died Tuesday in Nashville, according to a family statement. She was 80.

The statement said Parton died “peacefully.” A small, private service will be held for her close family, the statement added.

Parton died “after bravely facing a brief battle with cancer,” her publicist Marcel Pariseau later said.

The star had been open about various health issues in the last two years, and especially after her husband Carl Dean died in March 2025. “Back when my husband Carl was very sick — that was for a long time — and then when he passed, I didn’t take care of myself,” Parton said in a video to fans earlier this year. “So I let a lot of things go that I should have been taking care of

In a career that spanned over half a century, Parton captured the American experience, penning more than 3,000 songs. Those included “Coat of Many Colors,” a quiet ode to her mother, who stitched together garments in the family’s rural Tennessee home. She wrote and performed songs of love and heartbreak, like “Jolene” and “I Will Always Love You.” “9 to 5,” the title track from the movie of the same name, in which Parton also starred, became an anthem for American women and workers.

Parton went on to release 49 albums and win 11 Grammys, and became one of the most successful country crossover artists of all time, scoring regular hits on the pop charts, including “Islands in the Stream,” a duet with Kenny Rogers.

Later in life, she funneled her massive success into philanthropy, founding a library program that has gifted more than 300 million books to children around the world.

But Parton was always, first and foremost, a songwriter. She liked to tell the story of how one of her biggest songs, “I Will Always Love You,” came into the world. A love ballad that soared to ever greater heights once it was covered by Whitney Houston in the 1990s, the song began as a plea to her performing partner, Porter Wagoner, to let her move on from the TV show they appeared on together.

As she made her case to go solo, Wagoner, in her telling, “wasn’t listening to anything” she had to say.

“So I went home and wrote that song, took it back the next morning, and said, ‘Sit down, I need you to hear something.’ So I sang it, and he was crying,” she said. Wagoner relented and Parton, with a song that captured the pain of deep heartbreak, embarked on a solo career almost incomparable in the history of American music.

Born on January 19, 1946 in a one-room cabin in Tennessee, Parton grew up the fourth of 12 children. She described the family as “dirt poor.” Her father did not know how to read.

Music was always a part of the family, especially via her mother, whose father was a preacher who played piano and guitar. “My people were the ones that sang at funerals and weddings and shindigs and anything around locally,” Parton once recounted.

An uncle gave Parton her first guitar as a child. She learned to play when she was just 7 years old and started writing her own songs. “Mama was fascinated with how I could rhyme and write songs about stuff I’d never lived,” Parton said, “but I’d hear them talk.”

Parton moved to Nashville after high school to pursue her music aspirations. On her first day there, she met a man named Carl Thomas Dean outside a laundromat. “I was surprised and delighted that while he talked to me, he looked at my face (a rare thing for me),” she wrote many years later. “He seemed to be genuinely interested in finding out who I was and what I was about.”

Parton signed her first record deal, with Monument Records, in 1965, and married Dean the following year.

Growing ever more beloved in Nashville, Parton in 1967 landed regular appearances on “The Porter Wagoner Show,” a popular televised music variety show that helped her become a household name. She had her first number one hit with “Joshua” in 1971 (“Coat of Many Colors,” released the same year, made it to No. 4). By 1974, after seven years of first being Wagoner’s “pretty little girl” singing in support of him and then sharing the stage with him in many duets, Parton decided it was time to move on and, with a little help from “I Will Always Love You,” struck out on her own.