Hatch’s first “GRIT Accelerator” concludes, supporting Female entrepreneurs in North

Hatch Innovation has marked the conclusion of the first cohort of seven female-led startups from Sri Lanka’s Northern Province under the GRIT Business Accelerator Program with a “Demo Day” on the 25 November 2025 at HatchWorks in Colombo, where the entrepreneurs showcased their products and businesses to a range of stakeholders including investors, ecosystem builders and market linkage supporters.

This is an important step towards building a sustainable, gender-responsive entrepreneurial ecosystem in the Northern Province. The program, formally known as Growth, Resilience, Investment, and Training (GRIT), is a six-year joint project (2022–2027) between Global Affairs Canada (GAC) and the World University Service of Canada (WUSC) implemented by Hatch and other local ecosystem partners, that focuses on promoting resilience, innovation, and economic empowerment among female entrepreneurs.

The founders showcased the potential and impact of female-led enterprises addressing important market gaps in Northern Sri Lanka. By enhancing business skills, visibility, market access, and potential investment opportunities, Hatch maintains its commitment to making entrepreneurship accessible, inclusive, and scalable for women in emerging regions through this platform.

Hatch Innovation CEO Mevan Peiris said, “By supporting talented and determined female entrepreneurs who are innovating within real community needs, the GRIT project aims to create opportunity where it matters most. Our goal is to boost these entrepreneurs’ confidence, capability, and connectivity so they can thrive sustainably and help the long-term economic growth of the Northern region—which has historically been underserved. Hatch is committed to assisting high-potential entrepreneurs and allowing more women to take the lead in Sri Lanka’s innovation landscape.”

Senior Program Manager Ruvanara Tillekeratne added, “The success of this first cohort demonstrates what can transpire when women are provided the proper resources, networks, and mentors. GRIT is encouraging long-term resilience and regional economic development, not just businesses.”

The program’s priority on developing practical skills, one-on-one mentorship, investment readiness, and strategic growth planning is shown in the GRIT cohort, which represents a range of sectors.

Vonderly Founder Kirushanthi Shobethan shared her experience: “The program began with a thorough assessment of our company’s specific needs and realistic objectives. Subsequently, industry experts offered bespoke resources and practical guidance in crucial areas, including finance, HR, sales, and branding. The one-on-one mentoring, combined with real-world business examples, provided genuinely practical insights that significantly enhanced the experience. We extend our sincere gratitude to all our partners for their support throughout this transformative journey.

With a common goal of strengthening Sri Lanka’s entrepreneurial ecosystem, the event brought together professionals from the development sector, investors, corporate CSR leaders, angel networks, incubators and accelerators, government stakeholders, and media partners.

By demonstrating that women-led startups can reach scaled success with the correct support, the Demo Day event will encourage aspiring female entrepreneurs in the Northern Province to participate in subsequent program cohorts. Hatch Innovation remains open to support innovative candidates searching for financial opportunities, global exposure, mentorship through its business incubation and acceleration services.