Baby Cheramy partners with German Lanka Friendship Hospital to uplift maternity care

Baby Cheramy handed over a one-year supply of newborn diapers to the NICU of the German Sri Lanka Friendship Hospital, Galle, with representatives from both Baby Cheramy and the hospital in attendance

Baby Cheramy announced that, as part of its purpose to support mothers with more holistic childcare, the brand has successfully implemented a special initiative in partnership with the German Sri Lanka Friendship Hospital in Galle.

Through this initiative, Baby Cheramy introduced a series of directional and informational signages across the hospital to help visitors navigate with ease while accessing essential maternal and infant care information.

Presented in all three national languages, these signages offer guidance on pregnancy, childbirth, and early childcare, empowering parents to make informed decisions throughout their journey.

As part of its extended commitment, Baby Cheramy also initiated a one-year partnership to support the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) with a donation of newborn diapers.

The first phase, comprising a three-month supply of diapers, was handed over on 30 January, in the presence of Hospital Director Dr. K. M. M. Somarathna; Nursing Officer (NICU) S. W. A. F. Senani; Special Grade Nursing Officer T. K. P. P. Dias; and Medical Officer Dr. M. A. T. I. Wickramasinghe.

Designed to meet the highest standards of safety and comfort, Baby Cheramy newborn diapers are well-suited even for the delicate needs of preterm babies, reinforcing the brand’s commitment to infant hygiene and wellbeing from the very first day of life- especially in critical care environments.

Commenting on the initiative, Shiyan Jayaweera, Director – Marketing, Hemas Consumer Brands said, “The project including the NICU diaper support reflects Baby Cheramy’s long-standing purpose of creating a safer world through better access, education and solutions for holistic childcare for Sri Lankan mothers and babies. For over six decades, the brand has supported new mothers with trusted products and educational initiatives that promote better baby care and child-rearing practices.”

Dr. Somarathne Konara, Director of the German Sri Lanka Friendship Hospital commented, “This project, along with the generous donation of newborn diapers to our Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, has significantly enhanced the hospital experience for expectant parents and visitors.”

He added that the clear, informative signage provides practical guidance, while the educational content supports new mothers in key areas of care. “We highly value this partnership with Baby Cheramy, which helps us advance our shared goal of promoting the health and well-being of mothers and infants,” he said.

This latest collaboration between Baby Cheramy and the German Sri Lanka Friendship Hospital in Galle is another testament to the brand’s historical commitment to raising generations of Sri Lankans by empowering safe motherhood, educated parenting, and enhanced early childcare practices.