Traffic chaos in Kandy: Urgent government intervention needed

Air pollution in Kandy has reached unprecedentedly higher levels and health authorities have voiced their concern on several occasions about the issue of increasing respiratory diseases. Kandy does not have major industries or power plants and the sole contributor to air pollution is the large number of motor vehicles. The increase in air pollution in Kandy can be attributed to increasing traffic congestion and traffic jams, Combustion of petrol and diesel in motor vehicles produces carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and fine particles. When vehicles move in traffic jams, the familiar sight of black smoke coming from these vehicles is clearly visible to our naked eye.

However, the most dangerous air pollutants are the fine particles which we cannot see with our naked eye and technically known as the PM 2.5 fraction composed of particles with diameters less than 2.5 micrometres (1 micrometer is one millionths of a metre). These are respirable going right into our lungs and then to the bloodstream. Such particles have severe  impacts on the lungs and the heart. Exposure can result in coughing or difficulty in breathing, aggravated asthma,  development of other chronic respiratory diseases, chronic heart diseases and stroke.

In addition, these fine particles which are made up of carbon adsorb various unburnt hydrocarbons in petrol and diesel and some compounds such as the polyaromatic hydrocarbons are well known carcinogens. The PM2.5 level is often considered as the single most important parameter to determine air quality of a city and the level recorded for Kandy on 12-11-2025 was 50 microgrammes per cubic metre which is five times higher than the WHO standard of 10 microgrammes per cubic metre for healthy air. This parameter is typically used in the calculation of the air quality index (AQI) of a locality. It is possible to get the current AQI levels of major Sri Lankan cities from the internet web sites.

There are many reasons for the dismal state of the air quality in Kandy. Around 100,000 vehicles enter the city daily. Due to limited roads there are severe traffic jams which produce more fine particles compared to vehicles  moving at a steady speed. In addition, reopening Dalada Veediya should receive the immediate attention of authorities which will decrease the traffic congestion around the Kandy lake. This road has been closed on flimsy excuses and our politicians who are, too, concerned with the potential opposition from the Mahanayakas have never tackled this issue. Already, the Mahanayaka of the Malwatte chapter has given his consent to reopening this road. Government should talk to those who oppose reopening this road and convince them about the inconvenience caused to the general public and the need to reduce air pollution.

Traffic congestion is made worse by motorists, particularly the drivers of private buses and three wheelers who are least concerned about traffic rules and openly violate them in full view of the traffic police. The police, who take prompt action against ordinary motorists, turn a blind eye to three wheelers who openly cross even the double lines to overtake other vehicles.

The Kandy Peradeniya road is notorious for traffic snarls due to slow moving  Kandy-Penideniya buses. If the traffic slows down invariably one of these buses is in front. It is always due to these vehicles travelling at a snail’s pace, perhaps to allow passengers who walk along the street to get into buses. While buses are expected to pick passengers up only from bus halts, they are always picking up passengers from anywhere on the road.

Traffic policemen never stop these illegal practices to ensure a smooth flow of traffic. Recently in Dhaka, Bangladesh, a posse of policemen on motorcycles ride along congested roads to clear any traffic blocks caused by errant vehicles.  Such efforts are urgently needed in congested cities of Sri Lanka. Also, senior policemen instead of operating from air conditioned rooms  at the police stations should venture into the city streets to see how traffic policemen work, particularly during rush hours.

I have personally seen a former senior superintendent of police in the 1970s who used to stand at the municipal junction in Kandy keeping a watchful eye on the traffic and the policemen on duty.   We should realise that reducing air pollution also means reducing the health cost of people hospitalised for various ailments related to air pollution.

Traffic planning is also a vital aspect of controlling air pollution. Now buses ply through the city to the other end of town. One alternative which I proposed sometime back is to have long distance bus stands operate outside the city limits which will considerably reduce traffic congestion in the city. For example, buses plying to Mahiyangana and Rikillagaskada can start at Tennekumbura and the Colombo-Kandy buses can start from Peradeniya. Government can seek funding from agencies such as ADB to implement such a proposal.

Another proposal is to make the Kandy Peradeniya road and the William Gopallawa road as one-way streets. This was tried several years ago but stopped due to opposition from shop owners.

Air pollution in Kandy is considerably higher than that of Colombo since Kandy is located in a valley where pollutants get concentrated while in Colombo is in a flat terrain and sea breeze effectively disperses the pollutants generated. Air quality index for Colombo on 12-11-2025 is 78 while it is 137 for Kandy while the PM2.5 fraction values are 28 and 50 microgrammes per cubic metre respectively for Colombo and Kandy.

In developed countries pollution warnings are given to the general public over the radio and TV so that vulnerable people such as asthmatics and elderly people with heart problems can stay indoors. Even healthy people are warned not to do strenuous exercises when pollution levels are high. Unfortunately, even the automated air quality monitoring stations installed in Kandy and Battaramulla several years ago are now inoperative owing to poor maintenance, lack of resources and lack of interest by those in charge of the Environment.

Authorities should seriously consider easing traffic congestion in Kandy, and particularly the Police have a major role in controlling traffic caused by major offenders like private buses and three wheelers and also have long lasting traffic planning and implementation of novel ideas such as the relocation of bus stands.

In the Heart of the Amazon: COP 30 and the fate of the Planet

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.