US-Iran ‘peace deal’ announced; Trump says Strait of Hormuz reopening

AL Jazeera - United States President Donald Trump has announced that a ceasefire deal with Iran has been agreed to and that toll-free shipping through the Strait of Hormuz will now begin.

The agreement, later confirmed by Iran’s deputy Foreign Minister Kazem Gharibabadi on Sunday, will immediately end hostilities between Iran and the US.

Trump, who turned 80 on Sunday, said the deal allows for toll-free shipping through the Strait of Hormuz, which has been largely closed since the US and Israel launched an assault on Iran on December 28.

“The Deal with the Islamic Republic of Iran is now complete,” Trump wrote on Truth Social.

“Congratulations to all! I hereby fully authorize the toll free opening of the Strait of Hormuz, and, simultaneously herewith, authorize the immediate removal of the United States Naval blockade. Ships of the World, start your engines. Let the oil flow!”

He later said in a separate post, “This Great Deal will bring Peace and Security to the whole Region”, and hinted that a more comprehensive peace agreement with Iran would follow.

“Many presidents have tried to make Peace with Iran, and all have failed before me. The Leaders of the Region have, for the first time, found a President who can help them achieve real Peace. With the opening of the Strait upon the signing of the Deal on Friday, for purposes of mine removal, oil will flow on both ends again for the Region, and the World!” he wrote.

He also warned Iran, in an interview with The New York Times, that the US could restart military operations or become “the guardian of the Middle East” in exchange for 20 percent of the region’s revenues. It is not apparent if the interview was conducted after the deal was announced.

Trump’s announcement came after Pakistani Prime Minister Shebaz Sharif announced the deal on X, saying it is to end fighting on all fronts, including in Lebanon.

“Following intensive talks, we are pleased to announce that the Peace Deal between the United States of America and the Islamic Republic of Iran has been REACHED. Both sides have declared the immediate and permanent termination of military operations on all fronts, including in Lebanon,” Sharif wrote.

“We would like to thank the United States of America and the Islamic Republic of Iran for their commitment to finding a diplomatic solution to the conflict. We would also like to extend our sincere appreciation to our brothers in this mediation effort, the great leadership of the State of Qatar, for their support in reaching this agreement,” Sharif wrote.

“I would also especially thank the visionary leadership of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Republic of Türkiye for their immense contributions in this regard. With the agreement now in place, mediators will facilitate a series of meetings this week. These pre-implementation discussions will lay the foundation for the technical talks and the official signing ceremony.”

The announcement follows days of speculation that a deal would be reached. Trump had said earlier that a ceasefire agreement would be announced on Sunday, until Israel launched an air raid on Beirut’s southern suburbs, leading to fears that the agreement could be sabotaged.

Then, after repeated warnings by Iranian leaders that Tehran was ready to strike Israel for bombing Beirut – a red line for Tehran – Pakistan’s prime minister posted his announcement on X that a deal had been agreed upon, with other countries welcoming the news.

Qatar credited its partnership with Pakistan in helping a memorandum of understanding come to fruition, following intense mediation in recent days.

“The State of Qatar welcomes the agreement reached on the Memorandum of Understanding between the United States of America and the Islamic Republic of Iran on addressing the outstanding issues between them, including ensuring freedom of navigation in the Strait of Hormuz, and considers it an important step towards consolidating sustainable peace and promoting economic growth regionally and internationally,” Qatar’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs wrote on X.