Sri Lanka – Greater Mekong Business Council holds 14th AGM

The 14th Annual General Meeting (AGM) of the Sri Lanka – Greater Mekong Business Council (SLGMBC) of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce was held recently, at the Hilton Colombo Residence. The event was graced by Le Van Huong, Deputy Head of Mission of Viet Nam; Ms. Prangtip Kongrittisuksakon, Counselor of Thailand, and Ms. Wint Wint Khaing Tun, Counselor of Myanmar.

Addressing the gathering Le Van Huong, Deputy Head of Mission of Viet Nam, spoke about the many similarities in history, geography, and culture between Sri Lanka and Viet Nam and emphasised opportunities for collaboration in textiles, agriculture, fisheries, food processing, logistics, and tourism. He commended the SLGMBC and the Ceylon Chamber for their vital role in strengthening bilateral business relations. Mr. Huong reaffirmed the Embassy’s commitment to supporting entrepreneurs in both countries and encouraged Sri Lankan businesses to explore investment and trade opportunities in Viet Nam.

Ms. Tun, highlighted Sri Lanka’s USD 9 million investments in Myanmar. She further noted that bilateral trade has more than doubled to USD 11.4 million in 2024–2025 and emphasised the opportunity to expand collaboration in tea, tourism, coconut products, IT, healthcare, and gems and jewellery.

Ms. Kongrittisuksakon meanwhile highlighted the, signing of the Sri Lanka – Thailand FTA as a new milestone in long-standing relations between Thailand and Sri Lanka. She added that this provided an opportunity for Thailand and Sri Lanka to join hands in bringing ancient and traditional wisdoms, combined with appropriate science and technology, to enhance sustainability and people’s well-being in both counties and highlighted the collaborative opportunities in food, agriculture, and health sectors, and also business matching activities in these sectors.

Port City Colombo named ‘Best Knowledge Zone – Asia Pacific Region’

Sri Lanka is next destination in Emirates’ global recruitment drive for aircraft technicians

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.