Leading experts convene to combat Antimicrobial Resistance

November 24, 2025 – In view of World Antimicrobial Awareness Week (WAAW) 2025, New Anthoney’s Farms, one of Sri Lanka’s leading sustainable poultry producers, together with the Ministry of Health, hosted a landmark forum titled “Building a Collective Response: Act Now: Protect Our Present, Secure Our Future” on Monday, November 24 at The View, Waters Edge.

The forum was graced by Dr. Anil Jasinghe, Secretary of the Ministry of Health, as Chief Guest and Dr. Momoe Takeuchi, Officer in Charge of WHO Sri Lanka, as Guest of Honor. This forum brought together over 100 key stakeholders including industry leaders, policymakers, healthcare professionals, development partners, regulatory authorities, and media to drive urgent, coordinated action against AMR threat.

The centerpiece of the forum was a comprehensive two-hour panel discussion featuring four distinguished experts addressing critical aspects of AMR. The panel included Dr Palika S. Fernando, Additional Secretary (Livestock Development) at the Ministry of Agriculture; Dr. Renuka Jayatissa, President, SAARC Food Association Sri Lanka and Vice Chancellor, IIHS; Dr. Kushlani Jayatillake, Consultant Microbiologist, Sri Jayewardenepura General Hospital; and Dr. Susil Silva, Regional Head of Animal Utilization, U.S. Soybean Export Council (USSEC).

The session was moderated by Dr. Vindya Perera, President of the Sri Lankan Society for Microbiology and head of the Department of Microbiology at the Sabaragamuwa University of Sri Lanka. A moderated Q&A session allowed audience members to engage directly with all panelists, fostering collaborative solutions to this pressing challenge.

President to attend Ceylon Chamber’s Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit 2025 on opening day

HNB Assurance recognized with the Best Well-being Initiative for Working Parents

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.