Seed maize project approved under Ministry procedures, former Additional Secretary tells court

Colombo, Sep. 22 (Daily Mirror) - Giving evidence in the corruption case against former Minister S.M. Chandrasena, former Additional Secretary of the Ministry of Economic Development, Shantha Bandara told the Colombo High Court that the project for distributing government-imported seed maize had been approved in accordance with the procedures followed by the Ministry.

Bandara made this statement while giving evidence in the case against former Minister of Special Projects and former Deputy Minister of Economic Development S.M. Chandrasena over allegations relating to the distribution of government-imported seed maize.

Giving evidence before Colombo High Court Judge Ravindra Premarathne, the former Additional Secretary explained the procedure followed by the Ministry of Economic Development in considering and approving such projects.

The witness described the administrative process through which the proposal relating to the distribution of seed maize was submitted, considered and subsequently approved by the Ministry.

According to the indictment, the incident allegedly took place between January 1 and December 31, 2014, in the Anuradhapura District. The seed maize had been procured using public funds and was intended to be distributed to low-income farmers at concessionary prices.

The prosecution alleges that Chandrasena exerted undue influence over public officials, including the Director of Planning at the Anuradhapura District Secretariat, in connection with the distribution of 36,000 kilograms of seed maize.

The indictment alleges that the seed maize intended for the beneficiaries was instead distributed to persons associated with the former Minister.

The alleged conduct has been cited as an offence punishable under Section 70 of the Bribery Act.

The case was filed by the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC), which has brought two separate charges against the former Minister in connection with the incident.

Giving evidence, Bandara, who had served as an Additional Secretary of the Ministry of Economic Development, explained the role of the Ministry in approving the project and the administrative procedure that had to be followed before the project could be implemented.

Assistant Director (Legal) of the Bribery Commission Sulochana Hettiarachchi appeared for the CIABOC, while Senior Counsel Darshana Kuruppu and Attorney-at-Law Anjana Adikaramge appeared for the accused, S.M. Chandrasena.

Following the proceedings, further trial was fixed for October 12, 2026.