Iran vows ’devastating’ response as US threatens toughest ever economic hit

(Reuters) - Iran said on Friday that its response to any new U.S. threats would be "devastating" after Washington pledged to ​impose the toughest financial penalties in history with the aim of toppling the Iranian leadership.

U.S. Treasury chief Scott Bessent's comments on Thursday followed a warning from President Donald ‌Trump of economic consequences against any country that provided "any type of lifeline to Iran." Bessent promised details on Monday.

The chief of staff of Iran's Armed Forces, Major General Ali Abdollahi, said the Islamic Republic's reaction would be broad and decisive.

Oil prices steadied on Friday but were ​on track for a second weekly rise on concern over Gulf energy exports. Oil hit a more than three-week high on Thursday after the sanctions threat, intended to force Iran to agree an end ​to a conflict that has stranded millions of barrels of Middle Eastern oil.

"I'm not sure why oil has popped up on this," Bessent told CNBC. "If we are doing the maximum economic pressure, then that means that likely there will not be a large-scale kinetic restart," he said, using a term referring to military force.

Thousands of people have been killed in the war, which drew in Gulf nations and shocked markets as Iran flexed its ability to ​curb shipping through the Strait of Hormuz — a waterway that carried about a fifth of all traded oil before February.

"With preparedness across land, sea, air, air defence and cyberspace, Iran's armed forces will respond to the enemy's new threats with crushing, punishing and devastating responses," Abdollahi was quoted as saying by Iranian media.

Iran's powerful ​parliament speaker Mohammad Baqer Qalibaf, the country's main negotiator in mediated negotiations with the United States, said Washington appeared to have concluded it could not prevail in its direct ​military confrontation.

"We must make plans to deal with the unjust sanctions so that we can overcome them," he said during a visit to neighbouring ⁠Iraq, accusing the U.S. and Israel of resorting to what he said was economic and "cognitive" warfare.

The U.S. and Iran have twice announced ceasefire deals, in April and June, ​aiming to restore the free flow of shipping through Hormuz on a path towards ending the nearly six-month-old conflict, but both quickly crumbled.

Iran has weathered near-continuous, punishing economic sanctions for nearly 50 years, since the Islamic ‌Revolution of ⁠1979.

Before Bessent spoke, Iran's foreign ministry said it condemned U.S. economic and trade sanctions, calling them "economic terrorism" that would not "create even the slightest hesitation in Iranians’ determination to safeguard Iran’s independence, dignity and national sovereignty."

Bessent told CNBC he would share more details on the latest package and "talk about exactly what we're going to do" on Iran at a press conference on Monday.

"It is a one-two punch. We have the blockade (on Iran), and we are going to have the toughest sanctions in history," he added, referring to a U.S. naval blockade imposed on Iran in April and paused for a month ​in mid-June.