Koaloo.Fi and Stredge forge strategic partnership to offer businesses sustainable supply chain solutions

Paris-based Koaloo.Fi, an award-winning fintech specialising in supply chain performance, sustainability, and financing solutions, has announced a strategic partnership with Dubai & Colombo-based Stredge, recognised for its strong local presence and hands-on expertise supporting companies operating in complex and fast-evolving markets.

Koaloo.Fi is an award-winning fintech helping corporates, financial institutions, and suppliers improve supply chain performance through data, AI-driven analytics, and financing solutions. Koaloo.Fi was named Fintech of the Year 2025 (Universwiftnet / L’AGEFI), ESG Fintech 100, and Most Innovative Fintech (Treasury Management International), and operate across EMEA and Asia-Pacific.

Stredge supports companies, both local and global, navigating complex markets with multiple-sector expertise, and hands-on advisory focused on transformation & growth, empowering people, optimising operations, accelerating with technology, strengthening financials, and leading responsibly.

The partnership brings together highly complementary strengths. Stredge has deep local market knowledge, operational expertise, and close relationships with corporates and their supply chains. When combined with Koaloo.FI’s advanced sustainability technology platform, powered by artificial intelligence and data analytics, the partnership enables companies to have robust risk management, gain immediate profitability and fund long-term resilience.

The partnership also addresses the demands of a rapidly changing global trade environment. Global supply chains are being fundamentally reshaped by geopolitical fragmentation, new tariff regimes, trade route reconfigurations, and increasing regulatory pressure for transparency. At the same time, companies face rising expectations around ESG performance, climate disclosures, and emerging carbon pricing mechanisms such as the EU Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM).

Supply chains represent up to 90% of corporate ESG impact and around 40% of total profitability, yet remain structurally underfinanced, with an estimated USD 7 trillion global trade and supply chain finance gap. Addressing supplier performance, resilience, and access to liquidity has therefore become a strategic priority.

Together, Koaloo.Fi and Stredge help companies go beyond compliance to improve cash flow, protect margins, and strengthen supply chain resilience in an increasingly volatile global environment. Senior Consultant for Sustainability and Supply Chain Resilience, Prasanna Hettiarachchi is on board with Stredge, driving the sustainability pillar. He brings over three decades of hands-on leadership, strategy, and execution experience across corporate, industry, and national contexts.

“This partnership reflects our shared conviction that supply chain transformation must deliver immediate economic value, not just long-term compliance. By combining Stredge’s local execution capabilities with Koaloo.Fi’s advanced technology and financing solutions, we enable companies to act faster, finance smarter, and build more resilient supply chains,” said Koaloo.Fi’s Co-founder & CEO Mallika Mathur Lheritier.

“Our clients are seeking pragmatic solutions to today’s trade, cost, and regulatory challenges. Partnering with Koaloo.Fi allows us to complement our on-the-ground expertise with cutting-edge technology and innovative financing to deliver measurable impact across supply chains,” noted Stredge Consulting Middle East’s Director & CEO Chester Cruse.

“The strategic partnership with Koaloo.Fi will play a major role in creating value in supply chain transformation for our clients in all the markets we operate,” remarked Stredge Sri Lanka and Middle East Director Sumedha Wijesekera.

First Capital strengthens youth financial literacy by empowering 1,000+ students

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.