Nobel Peace Prize – winner, contender

The Nobel Peace Prize 2025 was announced on October 10th by the Norwegian Nobel Committee in Oslo; the winner being Maria Corina Machado. She is a politician, activist and a prominent leader of the Venezuelan Opposition to the governments of Hugo Chaves and Nicolos Maduro. Born in Caracas in 1967, she is 58 years old, married and has a son and daughter. Earlier, she won the Sarkharov Prize.

The prize was established by Alfred Nobel as one of the five prizes in his will. The other prizes are in Chemistry, Physics, Medicine and Literature. Since March 1901 it has been awarded annually, with some exceptions, to people who “have done the most or the best work for fraternity between nations, for the abolition of or reduction of standing armies and for the holding and promotion of peace congresses.” It is named the most prestigious prize in the world.

In accordance with Nobel’s will, the recipient is selected by the Norwegian Nobel Committee, a five member Committee appointed by the Parliament of Norway. The awarding ceremony has been held in Oslo City Hall since 1990; previously in the University of Oslo; in the Norwegian Nobel Institute and the Parliament.

Controversy surrounded some awards such as to Henry Kissinger for helping end the Vietnam War which he perpetrated to aid Richard Nixon’s re-election. Also more recently the awardee being President Obama who had the Al Quaida eliminated and watched the American Seals do it. Also criticism is that no Indian was given the Prize: no Nehru, no Gandhi, the latter who vowed to fast unto death to stop the massacre of Hindus and Muslims by each group. He succeeded to get peace to a certain extent in Inda, but no international recognition.

Politics was present, it is said, and strong antipathy to the Mahatma by Winston Churchill – who referred to him as ‘the half naked fakir who dared to climb the steps to the Viceroy’s palace in New Delhi’ though Lord Louis Mountbatten and Lady M were so approving of him.

Since 1990, twelve women have been awarded this prize, among them Marie Curie 1911; Mother Teresa 1979; Aung San Suu Kyi 1991; first African peace activist Wangari Maathai 2004; the young Pakistani who fought for education for girls – Malala Yousafzai 2014; Philippines journalist and freedom fighter Maria Ressa in 2021; Narges Mohammed 2023; and now in 2025, a Venezuelan. The first woman to receive the Peace Nobel was Bertha von Suttner in 1905, who wrote the best antiwar book in the early 20th century. She was an Austro Bohemian noblewoman and a pacifist and novelist.

President Donald Trump aimed at, canvassed for, and was certain he would be this year’s Nobel Peace Prize winner. As is his way, he claimed he had brokered peace in many conflicts and wars – exaggerated numbers – and even raised tariffs, many believe, against India since Modi was not going to champion him. So many articles and video clips appeared about him and his ambition. Maureen Dowd wrote in a recent issue of The Guardian: “One piece of gold President Trump is never going to get his short, stubby fingers on: an 18 carat gold medal with three naked men embracing, awarded to those who promote peace, democracy and human rights. But the prize was not designed for someone like Trump. The Norwegian Nobel Committee would no doubt have discontinued the prize rather than award it a person like him.

His longing is partly inspired by his jealousy of Barack Obama, who absurdly got the Nobel Peace Prize after only eight months in office for just being a cool dude.. Our 79 year old president admitted recently that he also envies Obama for the way he airily bopped down the stairs of Air Force One, while he himself has to slowly creep down, grasping the railing, worried that he’ll fall and look as unsteady as Joe Biden.”

Much worse has been written and reported about Trump and his failed ambition. Deservedly so.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.