Putting genie back into bottle

US President Donald Trump and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu prematurely claimed victory in their war on Iran immediately after killing Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and inflicting heavy damage on the Iranian military bases and economic nerve centres. Trump even snubbed UK Prime Minister Keir Starmer, when the latter decided to send a warship to the Gulf region belatedly; he said the US and Israel had already won the war and therefore he did not need British help. But Trump is now asking other countries to send their warships to ensure the safety of the commercial vessels sailing through the Strait of Hormuz, which Iran has closed and is using as an effective strategic lever to mount economic pressure on the US and its allies.

Trump keeps on contradicting himself. He has asked for ships from other countries while claiming that Iran has been ‘beheaded’. When Iran threatened to close the Hormuz Strait, Trump said he would deploy the US warships there. Iran has since attacked 16 or 18 ships in that strait. Trump now says, “Hopefully China, France, Japan, South Korea, the UK, and others that are affected by this artificial constraint will send ships to the area so that the Hormuz Strait will no longer be a threat by a nation that has been totally decapitated.” It was reported at the time of writing, that Trump had demanded help from all NATO allies to reopen the Strait of Hormuz. If Iran has been ‘decapitated’ as Trump claims, why can’t the US deploy its own warships to ensure the safety of vessels passing through the Hormuz Strait?

The response of the US allies to Trump’s request has been muted. China has reportedly rejected his call out of hand, saying the Strait of Hormuz is part of Iranian territory and Iran’s sovereignty must be respected. Why the other countries are wary of deploying their warships in a war the US and Israel have started is understandable. They know how dangerous naval incursions into Iran’s sea will be, with the war having taken an unexpected and unpredictable turn. Iran has unveiled new missile capabilities; it is now firing hypersonic missiles at Israel.

Washington has failed to live up to the expectations of its allies in the Persian Gulf. They expected the US to protect them against Iranian attacks. But they now have Iranian drones and missiles raining down on them, destroying their oil storage facilities and critical infrastructure. The US has sought assistance even from Ukraine, which has been dependent on Washington to fight Russia: it needs Ukrainian help to counter Iranian drone attacks on its allies in the region. This points to a serious military miscalculation the US and Israel have made. Shouldn’t they have done a proper assessment of Iran’s drone capability before going to war? They have spent billions of dollars to defend themselves against low-cost yet extremely destructive Iranian drones. Have Trump and Netanyahu bitten off more than they can chew in their war on Iran?

Trump, who once claimed that he deserved the Nobel Peace Prize more than anyone else, has plunged the entire world into chaos. Economies are groaning under soaring oil prices and global uncertainty. Economists have warned that at this rate the world may have a global recession to contend with sooner than expected. If the Iran conflict intensifies and/or drags on, the day may not be far off when economic hardships drive people to riot in many countries. Most of all, Trump’s military adventurism has severely damaged the foundation of the Washington-led global order, as it were. Iran is reportedly planning to allow passage for a limited number of tankers through the Strait of Hormuz on the strict condition that the cargo is traded in Chinese yuan and not US dollars. This strategy is aimed at not only circumventing US sanctions but also giving a boost to the de-dollarization campaign. The ongoing war has also made the US swallow its pride and do an about-turn on its sanctions on Russian oil.

In a dramatic turn of events, Trump has gone on record as saying that Washington is talking to Iran, but Tehran is not yet ready to make a deal to end the war. Iran has made it clear that it will not end the war on Washington’s terms. Iran’s President Masoud Pezeshkian has stated conditions for ending the ongoing conflict. He demands acceptance of Iran’s rights, reparations, and international guarantees against future aggression.

Had Trump acted wisely, weighing all possible military and economic ramifications of his military campaign and refrained from letting the genie out of the bottle in the Middle East, he would not have had to seek others’ help to force it back in. One can only hope that the other world powers will learn from the unfolding conflict, realise the need to act with restraint and strive to resolve the worsening Middle East conflict soon.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.