‘Defender even more distinctive and easy to use’

The unstoppable Defender 4×4 line-up is now more distinctive and ready for adventure than ever, thanks to upgraded finishes, design and technology enhancements across 90, 110 and 130 body designs – including Defender OCTA.

Upgrades across the Defender line-up include a crisp new headlight design with signature graphic when lit, fog lights as standard, and flush rear lights with smoked lenses. A refreshed palette of contemporary exterior colours and finishes, including Woolstone Green and Borasco Grey, is complemented by enhanced detailing and upgraded materials. Inside, a larger 13.1-inch touchscreen provides even more intuitive control for infotainment.

Technological upgrades see Adaptive Off-Road Cruise Control available as an option on Defender1 for the first time, making it even easier to negotiate rough terrain in comfort. And, Defender 130 is now available with an optional integrated air compressor for easily adjusting tyre pressures during multi-terrain adventures.

Defender OCTA, the extreme performance hero, benefits from an exclusive new Sargasso Blue exterior colour and tactile Textured Graphite accents in the latest programme of updates. A Patagonia White Matte Wrap exterior is also planned for Defender OCTA and 5.0-litre V8 models, available from late 2025.

Mark Cameron, Managing Director, Defender, said: “More than five years after its introduction, Defender has become an enduring success. With a bloodline that can be traced back to the first Series I of 1948, Defender continues to capture the imagination of our clients. The range now includes everything from the Hard Top commercial to the epic Defender OCTA. With production at full capacity to meet demand, the latest changes are part of our continuous commitment to make adventures even more satisfying. Fresh design enhancements, new colours and an expanded range of accessories follow Defender’s comprehensive upgrade last year, ensuring our iconic 4×4 is better than ever.”

Defender’s tough exterior receives optimised surfaces for the new front and rear bumpers – whether finished in Silicon Silver or Carpathian Grey Satin on most models – and a new textured pattern for the bonnet inserts and side vents, creating a strong and adventurous look. All models get new Gloss Black Defender-branded wheel centre caps.

Sri Lanka Tourism surpasses historic milestone with record tourist arrivals in 2025

CIPM Sri Lanka to host strategic workshop on sustainable performance management for organisational resilience

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.