Young SL face tough learning curve against HK

May.23 (Mirror Sports) - Sri Lanka will open their 2026 Asia Rugby Top 3 campaign against Hong Kong China at the Racecourse ground on Sunday (24) May with kick off scheduled for 3 pm.

The much anticipated encounter is expected to test the depth of the Sri Lankan squad, especially after a delay in naming the final 25-member pool. The delay came largely due to the unavailability of several leading sevens players who remained contracted for the Asian Sevens programme and the upcoming Asian Games preparations later this year in Japan plus injuries for as many as 10 leading players during the later stage of the Club encounters.

Head Coach, Dushanth Lewke has therefore been forced to reshuffle combinations and look towards fresh talent, with several players likely to earn their first caps in the opening fixture. Despite the setback, the Tuskers will look to make home advantage count and build momentum in front of local supporters.

Hong Kong China, who already secured qualification for the 2027 Rugby World Cup, are also expected to field a second-string outfit. However, their superior structure, speed and experience at international level will still make them formidable opponents.

Sri Lanka will need discipline, strong forward play and composure under pressure if they are to upset the visitors in this crucial opening clash. Former Science, Havies and CR skipper, Lasindu Karunathilake will lead the outfit with Tharindu Chaturanga appointed as the Vice Captain of the outfit.

Other matches in the AR Top 3 will be when Hong Kong China host South Korea on 7 June at the Hong Kong Football Club. The last encounter will see South Korea hosting Sri Lanka on 13 June at the Namdong Asia Rugby Stadium in Incheon, South Korea.

Hansith De Silva, Shamika Kaushan, Vimukthi Gamage, Thilina Bandara, Naveen Marasinghe, Tharindhu Chathuranga, Denuwan Wickramarachchi, Lasindu Karunathilake, Aruna Perera, Mursheed Zubair, Arosh Rathnayake, Thenuka Nanayakkara, Gamunu Chethiya, Pasindu Bandara, Yuwan Pathirana, Venura Kodhagoda, Sabith Musheen, Nisal Silva, Shenal Adhikaram, Naham Hemachandra, Viduna Amaneth, Asiri Senivirathne and Chirantha Kaluarachchi.