Pan Asia Bank launches its first Mastercard Debit Card with value-added benefits

From left : Dhanushka Sapugasthanna – Chief Manager Consumer Banking of Pan Asia Bank, Gayanath De Silva- DGM Credit of Pan Asia Bank, Naleen Edirisinghe – Director/CEO of Pan Asia Bank, with MasterCard officials Mahesha Amarasuriya - Country Manager Mastercard Sri Lanka, Buddhika Amunugama - Director of Account Management – Mastercard and Mahesh Weerasooriya - Director Technology Account Management Mastercard

Pan Asia Bank announced the launch of its new Mastercard Debit Card, marking another significant milestone in the Bank’s commitment to delivering innovative, customer-centric banking solutions. Designed to meet the evolving needs of today’s digitally connected consumers, the new debit card offers secure, convenient, and globally accepted payment capabilities, enabling customers to make everyday transactions with confidence, whether at home or abroad.

The elegantly designed vertical card combines enhanced security features with the convenience of cashless payments, providing customers with a seamless and rewarding banking experience across millions of Mastercard acceptance points worldwide.

Dhanushka Sapugasthanna, Chief Manager Consumer Banking at Pan Asia Bank said,”Mastercard has long been one of our most valued partners in the cards business, and we are pleased to extend that successful partnership beyond credit cards with the launch of our new Mastercard Debit Card. As a Mastercard World Debit cardholder, our customers gain access to a world of benefits, offers and experiences while enjoying secure and seamless payment capabilities wherever they go. The card’s design is inspired by an artist’s impression of the breathtaking beauty of Sri Lanka’s Idalgashinna Railway Station, embodying the essence of our brand promise as ‘The Truly Sri Lankan Bank’. It is a proud reflection of our Sri Lankan heritage, combined with the global reach and acceptance of Mastercard, bringing the best of both worlds to our customers.”

Commenting further, Naleen Edirisinghe, Director/CEO of Pan Asia Bank stated, “As a Sri Lankan bank deeply rooted in the communities we serve, the launch of this new debit card represents a meaningful convergence of innovation, community engagement and national pride. Our aim is to contribute towards promoting Sri Lanka’s cultural and tourism assets while continuing to enhance the experiences we offer our customers.”

The event was attended by Country Manager – Mastercard Sri Lanka, Mahesha Amarasuriya, and other company officials. “We are delighted to partner with Pan Asia Bank on the launch of its first Debit Mastercard, which combines innovative design with a uniquely Sri Lankan story. We look forward to strengthening our partnership with Pan Asia Bank as we advance digital payments and innovation in Sri Lanka,” Mahesha Amarasuriya said.

The launch further reinforces Pan Asia Bank’s commitment to innovation and customer-centric banking solutions.