Four new High Courts in Colombo under Anti-Corruption National Action Plan

In a bid to strengthen the judicial system’s capacity and expedite cases under the Anti-Corruption National Action Plan (2025–2029), the Cabinet of Ministers at their meeting on Monday approved the establishment of four new High Court premises in Colombo.

Announcing the decision at the weekly post-Cabinet meeting media briefing yesterday, Acting Cabinet Minister Vijitha Herath said the move comes as part of wider efforts to ensure timely execution of justice sector reforms and enhance the efficiency of anti-corruption proceedings.

“The Public Administration, Provincial Councils, and Local Government Ministry will hand over four State-owned buildings currently under its purview to the Justice and National Integration Ministry. These buildings, located in central Colombo, will be repurposed as new High Court premises,” he said.

The designated buildings are situated at: 1) No. B 88, Gregory Road, Colombo 7, 2) No. C 76, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 7, 3) No. B 108, Wijerama Road, Colombo 7 and 4) No. B 12, Stanmore Crescent, Colombo 7.

When inquired whether any of these premises were previously occupied by former Presidents, Herath said he was not aware of such details.

However, he confirmed that all four properties are under the control of the Public Administration Ministry, which has identified them as suitable for judicial use and it will soon be established.

“The establishment of these new High Courts is expected to ease the backlog of cases, particularly those related to corruption and financial crimes and marks another step in the Government’s ongoing judicial and governance reforms agenda,” he added.

Herath also revealed that a considerable number of underutilised State-owned buildings remain across Ministries, noting that the Education Ministry accounts for the highest number with a total of 436 properties that are currently unused or underused.

The proposal to this effect submitted by Justice and National Integration Minister Harshana Nanayakkara was approved by the Cabinet of Ministers.