Donald Stadtner’s Sacred Sites of Sri Lanka

Review of Sacred Sites of Sri Lanka by Donald Stadtner (River Books Thailand, Sailfish Publications Sri Lanka, 324 pages, Rs 10,000)

I don’t think it’s proper to begin a book review on an autobiographical note, but in this case, I make an exception. I first met Don Stadtner through an email in 2020. He had read an article of mine and queried me about it. I can’t remember what the article was – most of what I wrote back then, I admit, was pedestrian and is best forgotten – but I remember being struck by his enthusiasm. In one of his first emails, he mentioned to me that he was writing a book, and that it was about some cultural sites in Sri Lanka.

I got in touch with Stadtner again when I was assisting Dr SinhaRaja Tammita-Delgoda on his study of George Keyt. Don was himself an art historian, and it so happened that we needed access to a publication – an art journal – that could shed light on the 43 Group. As with most such rare books on Sri Lanka, it was not available in Sri Lanka, and I felt he would know where to find it. As luck would have it, he did, and he found it for us: it was right there, at the University of California Berkeley library.

Don and I finally met in 2024, when I was in San Francisco on an IVLP. Thought this turned out to be a short visit, we managed to catch up on what we were up to – all over a delicious dinner of kimchi and chicken rice at a Korean restaurant. Months later he and his wife came to Sri Lanka, where my friend and assistant-cum-guide Manusha guided us around some temples and ruins in Colombo. Six months later he returned to Sri Lanka to launch that book he said he was writing when we first connected.

Five years is a very long time, but here we are, and here it is. Sacred Sites of Sri Lanka – as deceptively self-explanatory a title as there can ever be – has hit the shelves in Sri Lanka. In addition to being a concise account of various historical places in the country, it is also, I daresay, a visual feast. The book came out in August, and since then has been read widely. It has not, however, been as widely reviewed.

I suppose that is to be expected at a time where few people read and even fewer bother to reflect on what they read. And if anything can be said about Sacred Sites of Sri Lanka, it is that it requires deep reflection and thought. This is not your off-the-cuff coffee table book on the art and history of Sri Lanka. That kind of book has been written many times by many people over the last so many decades. Stadtner’s study is of a different calibre, and part of its charm lies in how it resists easy categorisation.

Stadtner’s approach is not easy to grasp, and any lay reader who thinks otherwise is in for a rude awakening. His essays work on at least three levels. First, they are a visual narrative and exposition of various cultural sites. Second, they explore the different contestations and claims on those sites by different ethnic and religious groups. Third, they debunk some of the more prevalent myths associated with them.

The author is clearly mesmerised by these sites, but he does not allow himself to be carried away by them. As a result, Sacred Sites of Sri Lanka is both descriptive and anti-romantic: an unusual combination which recommends it well. Stadtner himself is hardly a utopian, and he goes to great lengths to question and challenge the falsifications surrounding these sites. What he is concerned about, ultimately, is why they have become sacred today, and what makes them sacred in the first place.

Stadtner mentions five qualities inherent to the sites that he explores in his book. First, they are associated with miracles. Second, they “operate in a world with porous boundaries.” Third, worshippers have to believe that prayers and material offerings will “advance their welfare.” Fourth, they are dynamic. The first three are self-explanatory; the fourth is not so easy to figure out. One of the more insightful things we learn in this book is how certain sites were associated with certain relics but how those relics lost their status over time. A good example here is the Buddha’s alms-bowl: Stadtner writes that it was paired with the tooth-relic for centuries, but today “it is all but forgotten.”

But perhaps the most important criterion, which makes any site sacred, is popularity. As the author rightly observes, hardly any Sri Lanka has not heard of the origin stories of places like Kataragama. The chapter on Kataragama, incidentally, is the most wide-ranging in the book, not least because every other community here has some claim on it. This has given rise to some rather interesting contradictions. For instance, while Kataragama is associated with Dutugemunu, the Sinhalese king celebrated for having killed the “Tamil” pretender Elara, some would find it amusing, if ironical, that before setting out to defeat his rival, he sought the blessings of Kataragama deviyo, a Hindu god.

Our collective histories are dotted with such ironies, and we would do well to learn them as we set out to discover our past. Unfortunately, we are a long way from such an ideal. If the state of our textbooks should tell us anything, it is that we need to be much more critical of our history. What Stadtner does with his book is to bring us closer to such a conception of the past, where social groups mingled freely with one another, and identified themselves in relation, not in opposition, to one another. This doubtless may not sit in well with popular historiographers, but it should be a critical component of the education and syllabus reforms which are now being promoted by civil society and the government.

Fundamentally, Sacred Sites of Sri Lanka is an anti-romantic book which sits in somewhere between a serious academic study and a coffee table book. Though much smaller and more concise than a coffee table book, it is also more accessible and less jargon-laden than a scholarly publication. This, I think, is what best explains Stadtner’s aim in his work: he wants to reach out to as wide an audience as possible, without pandering to popular notions of history. His approach can be summed up by a quote from Richard Gombrich and Gananath Obeyesekere, which he uses in his introduction.

I don’t like to add to the quotation, but I think it aligns with what Senake Bandaranayake once wrote about the artistic traditions of Sri Lanka – that they are:

“… as much a comment on our perceptions of that tradition and the historical trajectory that produced it, as they are indicators and reflections of our contemporary moment.”

The writer is a researcher, writer, and columnist whose work spans art, culture, history, and foreign policy. He is currently working on a study of Martin Wickramainghe and an oral autobiography of the late Sri Lankan director Sumitra Peries (1935-2023). He can be reached at udakdev1@gmail.com, and followed on Twitter @udakdev.

Shells that tell a story: Dr. Dinazard Raheem on Sri Lanka’s Ancient and Endangered Snails

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.