Students’ creativity raises voices against illegal migration at Zero Chance Awards

For the third consecutive year, Sri Lankan students’ creativity took center stage at the Zero Chance Art and Essay Awards Ceremony, held at BMICH, Colombo. The event showcased how students used art and writing to raise awareness about the dangers of illegal migration to Australia.

Held from 19 May to 17 July 2025, the competition saw a record 2,932 entries – 1,170 in art and 1,762 in essays -from 42 schools across 20 districts. A total of 199 students won first, second and third place prizes, while 60 students received certificates for fourth and fifth places.

A joint collaboration between the Australian Government and the Ministry of Education and Higher Education, the competition encourages students to express their understanding of the risks associated with illegal maritime migration to Australia, under the theme:”Attempting to journey by boat to Australia is a foolish action.”

Gracing the occasion, Australian High Commissioner to Sri Lanka, Matthew Duckworth, remarked: “Thirteen years ago, Operation Sovereign Borders – a military-led border security operation designed to protect Australia’s borders, combat people smuggling in the region, and, most importantly, prevent people from risking their lives at sea – was established.”

He continued: “Since then, every Sri Lankan people-smuggling boat that has entered Australian waters has been stopped, and all those on board returned to Sri Lanka. Crucial to the success of this operation is the far-reaching Zero Chance strategic communication campaign, which is designed to inform, educate and deter people from undertaking such dangerous sea journeys.”

Further acknowledging the students’ impact, he stated: “As students, writers and artists, you have helped tell a story to a wide audience, preventing vulnerable Sri Lankans from risking their livelihoods and lives.”

Submissions were evaluated by ministry-appointed judges in two age groups: Years 9–11 and Years 12–13.

“It is a great privilege to be here celebrating the success of the Zero Chance competition. Our ministry’s focus goes beyond just achieving good grades. We want our young people to grow in all ways — to think critically and to care about the world around them,” said Director of Education Waruna Kaluwewa, Representative of the Secretary to the Ministry of Education, Higher Education and Vocational Education.

Fems’ three-year winning streak at the SLIM Brand Excellence Awards showcases its mission to empower women nationwide

Sri Lanka’s largest youth and pop culture celebration rescheduled to January 2026

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.