Dialog and OREL partner to advance smart living

From left: Dialog Axiata PLC Product Manager IPTV & Smart Home Ranoj Norbert; Senior Product Manager – Post Paid and Enterprise Business Shanaka Fernando; Head of Home Business Sampath Welhenage; Head of Business – Media & Home Pubudu Aluthgedara; Group Chief Operating Officer Lim Li San; OREL Chief Operating Officer Manjula Priyadarshana; Director – Wealth Management Sudath Kumara; Director – Innovations Dr. Rangika De Silva; Head of Electrical & Electronics Product Development (R&D) Chethana Alwis; Assistant General Manager – Marketing Gayan Lakshan Perera; and Senior Manager – Sales & Marketing (Electronics) Rakitha Wanigasuriya

Dialog Axiata PLC has announced a strategic partnership with OREL Corporation Ltd., bringing together complementary strengths in digital platforms and device innovation to enhance smart living experiences in Sri Lanka.

As part of this collaboration, the two companies will work together across both digital entertainment and smart home solutions. This includes integrating the Dialog Play Smart TV App into OREL’s smart TV range, enabling customers to access a wide range of content directly through their televisions, as well as introducing co-branded smart home devices integrated with Dialog’s Smart Home App, starting with smart power strips.

Together, these initiatives are designed to make everyday digital interactions more seamless by bringing entertainment and smart home functionality into a single, more accessible ecosystem.

The partnership reflects a shared intent to expand Sri Lanka’s smart ecosystem by combining OREL’s capabilities in product design and manufacturing with Dialog’s digital platforms and customer reach, while also creating a foundation for future innovation across connected technologies.

Dialog Axiata Group COO Lim Li San said: “At Dialog, our strategic obsession is to simplify how customers incorporate technology to ease their daily lives. Through this partnership with OREL, we are excited to integrate our Dialog Play App into OREL Smart TVs so that our customers can enjoy over 50,000 hours’ worth of content without having to invest in any additional hardware. Likewise, the integration of locally manufactured Smart Home devices into Dialog’s Smart Home App is another key step towards accelerating the adoption of smart living in Sri Lanka as our digital ecosystem continues to mature.”

OREL COO Manjula Priyadarshana said: “Orel is among the few companies in Sri Lanka with fully integrated design engineering, hardware development, and manufacturing capabilities—enabling us to deliver high-performance, premium-quality products driven by true design ingenuity. Our partnership with Dialog enhances this further by enabling a seamless smart home experience, combining strong hardware with an intuitive digital interface. We are confident that this will further strengthen the smart ecosystem and achieve meaningful success in the market”

Through this collaboration, Dialog and OREL aim to accelerate the adoption of smart technologies in Sri Lanka by offering solutions that are practical, locally relevant, and designed to enhance everyday digital experiences.