The most extreme hurricanes in history

Hurricane Melissa hit Jamaica with the strongest wind speeds the Caribbean nation has ever experienced. Here’s how it compares to other record-breaking storms.

In October 2025, category five Hurricane Melissa made landfall in south-western Jamaica, with winds of 185 mph [295 kmph],  making it the strongest storm of the year in terms of wind speed and one of the most powerful Atlantic storms on record. The World Meteorological Organization described it as the ‘storm of the century’ for Jamaica and the National Hurricane Center warned that it would bring “catastrophic and life-threatening flash flooding”.

Here we look at some of history’s other powerful and destructive hurricanes.

On the night of 9 October 1780, after a balmy day on the Caribbean island of Barbados, rain began to fall. The next morning a breeze pickedup – and by 6pm a hurricane slammed into the island at full force. Known as the Great Hurricane, it remains the deadliest Atlantic hurricane ever recorded. Estimates of the death toll range between 20,000 and 27,500.

The hurricane whipped across the land, with winds of likely more than 200mph (322km/h) that were so loud people couldn’t hear their own voices. Little was left but nud, debris, dead cattle and rotting corpses.

Leaving Barbados, the Great Hurricane moved past Martinique, Saint Lucia, and Sint Eustatius. Waves reaching 25 ft [7m] high washed whole villages into the sea and entire fleets of British and French naval ships – along with the thousands of people aboard – were lost to the bottom of the ocean.

The Great Hurricane devastated several Caribbean islands in 1780 (BBC)

The deadliest storm in US history was the Galveston hurricane of 1900. It passed over the Gulf of Mexico in early September 1900, strengthening to a category four hurricane before  slamming into Galvestone Texas, on 6 September.

“We kept running into so many dead bodies that I had to go forward with a pike and shove [them] out of the way… it was the most horrible thing I have ever seen,” a surviving fisherman is reported to have said.  The storm is estimated to have caused between 6,000 and 8,000 deaths.

Galveston was left in tatters after the 1900 hurricane passed through (BBC)

More deadly storms still have taken place outside the Atlantic basin, where these storms are known as cyclones or typhoons rather than hurricanes. The Bhola Cyclone of 1970 collided with north-east India and what was then East Pakistan (present-day Bangladesh). It brought with it a devastating storm surge of 35ft (10.5m). In total, as many as 500,000 people are thought to have been killed by cyclone.

Cyclone Bhola is thought to have led to the deaths of up to 500,000 people when it hit what is now Bangladesh in 1970 (BBC)

How you measure the damage caused by hurricanes is a matter of perspective. For the people who lose property, livelihoods and loved ones, the storm that has just swept over them was devastating. But if you examine it purely in terms of the number of properties destroyed, two hurricanes stand out – Katrina and Mitch.

The main reason why Hurricane Katrina ranks as the costliest hurricane in history is the sheer scale of the destruction it left in its wake across the south-east US. It is estimated that between 217,000 and 300,000 homes were destroyed or left uninhabitable by the storm. Wind speeds of up to 140mph [225kmph] careered into south-east Louisiana. The storm surge reached 25-28 ft[7.68.5m] above normal tide levels along the Mississippi coast and 10-20ft [3m-6.1m] above normal tide levels along the south-east Louisiana coast. In New Orleans, the driving waves and storm surge smashed through the levees intended to protect the city.

Hurricane Katrina brought destruction on a previously unimaginable scale to Louisiana in 2005 (BBC)

Overall, nearly 0% of the city was inundated with floodwater that reached 6m (20ft) deep while 59 tornadoes propagating from the storm spread further damage across eight states.

This damage made Hurricane Katrina the costliest hurricane on record to hit the US, resulting in a total of $201.3bn (£148.3bn) in damage, when adjusted for inflation to 2024 US dollars. After Katrina, the second costliest was Hurricane Harvey, which caused $160bn (£118bn) in damage when it made landfall in Texas and Louisiana.

The damage caused by Hurricane Katrina made it the most costly in history (BBC)

But nearly seven years earlier, another hurricane caused almost as much destruction as Katrina.

In the US, Hurricane Mitch left behind relatively minor damage – 645 homes in Florida were destroyed by the storm as it swept across the Gulf of Mexico from the Yucatán Peninsula of Mexico in October 1998. By then, however, it had already done its worst.

Hurricane Katrina left 80% of New Orleans underwater and a population in crisis [BBC]

A week earlier Mitch had slammed into Honduras, obliterating entire communities as it cut a swathe of destruction across Central America. This storm was a monster – a category five hurricane that still ranks as one of the most intense on record.

By the time it hit Honduras, it had weakened to a category one hurricane, but on making landfall it got stuck, hovering over Honduras and dumping huge amounts of rain. The flooding and landslides that followed left between 10,000 and 19,000 people dead across Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Belize and El Salvador. At least 200,000 homes were demolished or severly damaged by the storm. In Honduras alone, 70,000 homes and 92 bridges were destroyed, with whole villages being swallowed by rivers of mud that swept down mountainsides. The UN estimated that, in all, more than half a million people lost their homes.

Hurricane Mitch set Honduras’s economic development back by 50 years according to the country’s president in 1998 (BBC)

You could be forgiven for assuming that the most powerful storms are the ones that cause the most damage and take the most lives. That’s not always the case.

Hurricane Patricia was the 24th storm of the 2015 hurricane season, and formed near the Gulf of Tehuantepec off Mexico’s southern coast. Favourable conditions meant it grew from a tropical storm to a category five hurricane in just 24 hours.

On 23 October, Patricia’s highest wind speed sustained over 10 seconds was 221mph (356km/h), measured from an aircraft in flight (speeds of 210mph, or 338km/h, were measured at ground level). It was the highest speed ever recorded in the Western Hemisphere and as intense as one of the most powerful storms ever recorded, 1961’s Typhoon Nancy.

Hurricane Patricia caused widespread damage to property, but few lives were lost (BBC)

Patricia’s path cut through relatively unpopulated parts of Mexico, missing large cities, which limited its frath toll. It also dramatically weakened after it hit the Mexican coast, though it made landfall with recorded wind speeds as high as 265kmh [165mph].  The effect of Mexico’s mountainous terrain further weakened Patricia, and by 24 October it had dwindled to almost nothing.

Despite its intensity, Patricia’s death toll was surprisingly small – only two people died directly as a result of the storm, with four additional indirect deaths, according to the Us’s National Oceanic And Atmospheric Administration.

This week, Hurricane Erin became the Atlantic’s first hurricane of 2025, skirting the US mainland leading forecasters to issue warnings to surfers about rip currents. It is thought to be one of the most rapidly intensifying hurricanes on record so early in the season. The strongest storms tend to occur later year, after 1 September. Erin went gtpm category one hurricanr to a category five in just over 24 hours, before weakening again to a category two storm.

Rapid intensification is an increase in the maximum sustained winds of a tropical cyclone of at least 30 knots (35 mph) in a 24 hour period, according to the US’s National Weather Service  Such fast-intensifying hurricanes can be particularly dangerous, since people have less time to prepare for them.

Hurricane Milton intensified rapidly, fuelled by warm waters and conducive atmospheric conditions (BBC)

Erin is not the only storm to rapidly intensify in recent years. In 2024, Hurricane Milton became the fastest Atlantic sorm ever to intensify from a tropical depression to a category five hurricane. The same year, Hurricane Beryl broke a record as the fastest ever Atlantic storm occurring in June or early July to intensify from a tropical depression to a hurricane. In 2023, meanwhile, Hurricane Lee and Hurricane Jova stunned scientists with their sudden intensification, especially considering they did so during an El Nino, which normally suppresses hurricane activity in the Atlantic.

Of course hurricanes have always intensified at different rates. Two other Atlantic hurricanes  – Felix in 2007 and Wilma in 2005 – are also noteworthy for their especially rapid intensification.  But research has shown overall intensification rates have significantly increased in recent years due to global warming, a trend which is set to continue. It’s all down to the warmer sea surfaces these storms pass over due to climate change – Erin, for example, passed over waters that were on average, 1.1C warmer due to climate change.

[This story was updated on 28.10.25 to include a reference to Hurricane Melissa].

Israel launches strikes on Gaza after Netanyahu orders ‘powerful’ attacks

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.