Takeover of estates and failure of Provincial Councils

The take over of estates created untold suffering to the estate population. During my circuits as a public servant soon after the change of management in the estate areas, I saw stacks of coffins for little children by the roadside. Obviously children were starving to death. Hundreds of old workers were pushed out of their estates to beg on the roads without food or medical attention. Many of them died of starvation.

All the while the so called “People Alliance” members, including the leftists, were stripping the plantations of their well maintained assets. It is a chapter which will redound as a curse to the so called socialists of this country for decades to come. Such deaths and suffering is a standing indictment of foolish administrators, particularly among the so called progressives. The human suffering they inflicted had to be seen to be believed.

Thondaman was the undisputed leader of the estate Tamils at that time. Though he remained in Parliament to be the right hand man of JRJ and Premadasa, his assistants represented him in the Central Provincial Council (CPC). The leader of this group was Devaraj who was a well educated and sober representative. He was a leftist by conviction but was totally loyal to his boss and only intervened to promote Thondaman’s agenda.

Devaraj and I were members of several delegations on foreign tours. We became good friends and later when he was elevated by his patron to be a Member of Parliament we spent quite some time together. He was assisted by Muthu Sivalingam who also became an MP and Deputy Minister. Another CWC member of the CPC was Sathasivam who came from a high caste estate family. With his fluency in three languages and tall stature he became a darling of the embassy cocktail circuit and thereby lost his standing within the party.

If my memory serves me right he left the party and went into oblivion. There were others from the younger generation like Arulsamy who are still influential provincial politicians. Thonda’s supremacy was challenged only by Chandrasekeran, a charismatic figure and a brilliant Tamil orator as mentioned earlier. He was cutting into the CWC vote with his party and emerging as an estate Tamil leader till he was felled due to alcoholism.

He entered Parliament and carried a vital vote which sustained the CBK administration. He too was made a Deputy Minister and I would encounter him in Parliament much the worse for drink. All of them however were later eclipsed after the death of the old man by his grandson “‘Thambi” Thondaman-a well educated and fun loving young man who became a fixture in every Cabinet. “Thambi” was the son of Ramanathan – the old mans son and heir – who was a Trinitian and had been a Minister in the previous CPC regime.

Unfortunately Ramanathan who was a perfect gentleman died young. The mantle fell on Thondaman Junior, who assisted by Devaraj and Muthu Sivalingam, maintained the CWC slot in the Sri Lankan Cabinet that had been earned by his master strategist grandfather through collaboration with successive Presidents. The senior Thondaman’s statue now adorns the courtyard of the old Parliament together with the statues of other national heroes. It is a well deserved tribute to a leader of a community that has served its adopted nation well above the call of duty. No one would deny that they deserve much more.

Having served as member of a Provincial Council and observing its operations at first hand I am convinced that the PCs as presently constituted are a costly failure. I recall the discussions that were held during the JRJ regime at the urging of the Indian government to offer some form of devolution to the Northern and Eastern provinces. This was mainly because the complex Indian political situation at that time demanded the appeasement of Tamil Nadu politicians. These leaders all together pressed the Indian Congress government to push the Sri Lankan authorities to devolve powers to representatives elected from the North and East.

It meant that Tamil politicians would enjoy some devolved executive powers. Behind this Tamil demand was the ghost of their recently proclaimed concept of the North and East as the Tamil “homeland”. Every attempt was made to find the language to satisfy both sides as the Sri Lankan Government would not, indeed could not, agree to demarcate “Tamil homelands” which would have collapsed the concept of “territorial integrity” and “sovereignity” which form the basis of our national identity.

Till the last moment Provincial Councils were to be established only in the North and East. They were to be the only “unit of devolution” according to the first draft. Indeed according to that draft there would be created a “temporarily” joined North-Eastern province. After a plebiscite in the Eastern province the voters there could decide on a permanent joinder or not.

What powers would devolve on the PCs? JRJ resolved this vexed issue by decreeing that we should “in toto” adopt the powers devolved to the Indian states under their Constitution. This entailed the adoption of three “lists”. List One would include the powers of the Centre. List Two would include the powers of the PCs. A third list would have “concurrent powers”where practical necessity required a sharing of power.

In this way the unit of devolution and the powers to be devolved were agreed upon and would later find constitutional affirmation via Parliament in the 13th amendment. But the outrage evoked by these proposals among the majority Sinhalese frightened JRJ. What he feared most after the UNP debacle of 1956 was the backlash of the Sinhalese voter. Therefore at the last minute he changed the decision to set up PCs only for the North-East and extended it to all provinces.

Thus the opposition could not argue that the North-East would become a special geographical and cultural entity which would enjoy devolved powers not available in the rest of the country. The Muslims too welcomed this change as they could dominate the Eastern PC together with the minority Sinhala or if necessary, alone. Thus the whole country was subjected to a radical change by the creation of a second tier of governance out of a structure which was conceived as a solution to a different problem, namely the ethnic and geographical configuration of the population of the country.

The financial arrangements for the implementation of this new tier of administration created many problems. The new PCs instead of being managed as lean and mean entities as earlier envisaged, were converted by the politicians, who were appointed as Chief Ministers, into pale imitations of the perks and procedures of the Ministers of the central government. All the wasteful expenditure on vehicles, staff, bungalows and local and foreign travel were duplicated at the provincial level particularly by the southern CMs, officials and their hangers on.

The PCs were allowed to levy several taxes as a way of collecting revenue. However this too created a problem as they started collecting taxes from all the productive enterprises to finance their conspicuous consumption. It raised a storm of protest from investors and the Ministry of Finance had to intervene by prohibiting PCs from exercising that right. Instead the Treasury provided a “block grant” to them based on population figures.

This did not prevent the PCs from constantly asking for more funds putting a further strain on the country’s resources. Then a question of staffing arose. It was decided to recruit to such positions from the SLAS and allied services. However minor staff and clerical officers were recruited direct to the PC. This provided ample opportunities for local politicians to go on a recruiting spree. Since some technical services such as road building and minor irrigation were devolved subjects, provincial departments were set up by absorbing local recruits from the all island services.

They were provided with budgeted funds and a provincial work program. However since many of those recently absorbed officials were comparatively inexperienced the quality of the local technical services suffered as could be seen from the poor quality of roads and minor irrigation works in the outstations. When I became the Minister of Public Administration I had to ensure that the state officials who were on secondment came back to the senior service.

Chief Ministers and local Ministers were loath to release their seconded officers with whom they had “sweetheart deals”. But I had to insist on the rules of secondment which were meant to ensure the integrity of the public service. Our Ministry was not very popular with the Chief Ministers. Once when I cautioned them against following the wasteful symbolic expenditure of Cabinet ministers, Bertie Dissanayake, a “strong man” type of Chief Minister of North Central Province, held a press briefing criticizing my interference in their affairs.

I found it comparatively easy to perform my duties as a Provincial Councilor as I had served as Additional Government Agent of Kandy district and Government Agent of Matale district. These two districts covered two thirds of the area of the CPC and I knew them like the back of my hand. Furthermore, I represented Harispattuwa electorate which was the largest in the Kandy district. My parental home in Nugawela was located in the centre of the electorate and I used it as my office.

Villagers were quite used to coming there to see my parents who were popular teachers in the district. Apart from servicing the needs of my electors at a time when letters of recommendation were vital for even menial tasks, I tried to look at the bigger picture and promote some projects which would be of benefit to a large number of my constituents. On my suggestion the building of a major roadway linking Ankumbura with Ridigama in Kurunegala district was undertaken. In addition to easing access between villages on the boundary of these two districts it facilitated the exchange of agricultural products as well as services.

We were delighted when the price of coconuts from Kurunegala dropped in Harispattuwa thanks to shorter travel and better links with producers. Similarly spices which were a speciality of my electorate got better prices because urban traders would come over to buy pepper, nutmeg, cloves and cardamom direct from producers. I also used my allocation of funds from the PC to purchase plants and seedlings from the Agriculture Department in Peradeniya and distribute them to many villages so that we would have a big enough crop every season to interest more affluent buyers.

Today, many years later, when I visit these villages I see mango, coconut, avocado, guava, rambutan and banana groves laden with fruit. Often the villagers would prepare a basket of mangoes for me after a meeting to thank me for those budded plants I distributed many years ago. I experimented with growing rambutan plants I bought in Malawana, along the river banks of Hataraliyadde. A private entrepreneur who got the cue from me now has a large rambutan grove that is famous in the area. He is now known as “Rambutan Mahattaya” thanks to my links with Malwana.

As I mentioned in Volume One of my autobiography – The Kandy Man – I had a friend in Malwana named GT Wickremasinghe who rented out fruit laden Rambutan trees and I would take my young family for a day’s outing there to come back with a car full of rambutans which we happily distributed to our friends and relatives. Later my friend Sarathchandra Rajakaruna of Dompe, who was a Deputy Minister, would call over with a basketful of delicious fruits every season.

But my greatest achievement was in supporting the growing of ginger on a commercial scale in villages in the Galabawa area in Galagedera where the paddy fields are ideal for growing of alternative commercial crops like ginger, turmeric and linseed. The credit for this path breaking development should go to a dedicated Agricultural Officer by the name of Abeyaratne who became my close confidante and electoral supporter. He negotiated with the Kandurata Bank for credit to farmers who were willing to grow ginger in several villages which had large “yayas” or paddy fields and had proper irrigation facilities.

We negotiated with Elephant House – the manufacturer of Elephant Ginger Beer. Fortunately for us this division of Elephant House was led by my friend Jit Gunaratne who immediately saw the value of this arrangement and entered into an agreement with the local producers cooperative. The collaboration of the Kandurata Bank, Abeyaratne, Jit Gunaratne and the farmers cooperative was exemplary and the farmers who were used to low paddy yields and marginal profits now earned a tidy income.

This was shown in their new houses and tractors that we observed with much satisfaction. I recall one instance later on when the then acting Minister of Agriculture, Maithripala Sirisena, gave an order to the commercial banks not to provide loans for farmers who were abandoning paddy production and turning to other crops like ginger and turmeric. This led to a storm of protest from my farmers who arrived at my Nugawela office in buses and tractors to solicit my assistance to get Sirisena’s directive rescinded. I saw the justice of their request and in their presence called up MS at his residence in Polonnaruwa. I told him about the success of our program and threatened him that unless he withdraws that directive I would resign forthwith and go public about his incompetence.

I was happy when he immediately agreed with me and rescinded his directive a few days later. It was a dramatic victory and the older farmers still recall that encounter when I visit their fields. Now growing alternative commercial crops has caught on in even the neighbouring electorates and manufacturers of other brands of ginger beer also buy from my electorate. Both Jit and Abeyaratne are now in retirement and, as a matter of fact, so am I.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.