BELGOLUX–Sri Lanka Business Evening in Belgium

The Embassy of Sri Lanka in Belgium in collaboration with the BELGOLUX–Sri Lanka Business Council (BLSBC) successfully hosted the “BELGOLUX–Sri Lanka Business Evening” on 24 February 2026 in Brussels.

The event brought together over 55 participants including Belgian companies, entrepreneurs, professionals, and business-related organisations eager to explore business opportunities and economic partnerships between Belgium and Sri Lanka.

The Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Belgium, Luxembourg, and the EU, Chandana Weerasena, warmly welcomed participants and highlighted the longstanding relationship among Sri Lanka, Belgium, Luxembourg and the European Union. He emphasised Sri Lanka’s evolving economic landscape and the strategic importance of strengthening ties with BELGOLUX countries and the EU. Ambassador Weerasena positioned the BLSBC as a premier institutional mechanism to advance commercial cooperation.

The Minister (Commercial) of the Embassy, Thavishya Mullegamgoda presented insights on economic relations between Sri Lanka and Belgium focusing on trade, investment and tourism sectors and highlighted potential areas for mutual collaboration. She shared an overview of current business opportunities in Sri Lanka mainly focusing on projects in the ports, logistics, and tourism and hospitality sectors. Her presentation sparked considerable interest among attendees, many of whom were previously unaware of the country’s extensive trade and investment potential.

The BLSBC President Thomas De Beule outlined the mission, objectives, and membership opportunities of the BLSBC as a structured forum for fostering commercial collaboration between Sri Lanka, Belgium and Luxembourg. He also highlighted the council’s achievements since its inception on 21 November 2025, including activities carried out over the past few months and details about current members.

A key focus of the evening was providing detailed information on the forthcoming business delegation from Belgium and Luxembourg to Sri Lanka, scheduled to take place from 17-21 June 2026. The mission will include BELGOLUX-Sri Lanka business forum, curated B2B meetings, institutional engagements, sector-focused company visits, active participation in Sri Lanka Expo 2026 and the visit to the Colombo Port City. Encouragingly, several attendees expressed a favourable interest in joining the upcoming business delegation to Sri Lanka, reflecting growing confidence in the structured engagement model promoted by the Embassy and BLSBC.

The evening continued with an engaging networking session, allowing participants to exchange ideas and explore collaboration opportunities in greater depth, while enjoying an authentic Sri Lankan dinner reflecting the country’s rich culinary heritage.