Anton drinking water pipes set benchmark with NSF certification

Anton, a pioneer in Sri Lanka’s PVC manufacturing sector for over 60 years, has announced that its drinking water pipe range has been officially certified lead-free under NSF/ANSI/CAN 61 by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF). The company is the first in Sri Lanka to achieve such a certification, reaffirming its commitment to safeguarding public health and maintaining the highest standards of product safety and environmental care.

The National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) is a globally recognised public health organisation based in Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. The foundation is dedicated to testing and certifying several parameters within food, water and consumer production to ensure they adhere to strict safety and quality requirements. The NSF is accredited by the American National Standards Institute and the Standards Council of Canada, which reinforces its credibility and authority in setting and upholding international public health standards.

The NSF/ANSI/CAN 61 certification highlights Anton’s proactive approach for providing safer and more responsible building materials through adherence to globally accepted quality and environmental standards. There are certain pipes available in the market that use harmful lead compounds, which are unsafe for drinking water and could be harmful in the long term, therefore it is imperative that customers look for certifications from institutions such as NSF before purchase.

Anton’s pressure pipes use non-toxic, lead-free stabilisers, which are both healthier and eliminate the risk of lead poisoning. The company’s continuous dedication to offering uncompromised quality and durability, further cements the trust it has built over 60-years,

Anton CEO Mr. Lahiru Jayasinghe said: “Achieving the NSF lead-free certification represents our continuous dedication to safety, quality, and sustainability as a brand that prioritises the wellness of our consumers and communities. We are delighted to provide PVC solutions that satisfy internationally benchmarked safety standards while promoting a healthier and more sustainable future.”

The certification strengthens the trust that homeowners, construction professionals, and commercial users have in Anton’s brand and acts as an independent validation of the company’s manufacturing processes. With this certification, Anton increases its commitment to fostering a safer built environment and driving positive industry change through accountability and leadership.

Anton’s Drinking Water Pressure Pipes and manufacturing facilities undergo rigorous testing processes to assess the presence of heavy metals such as lead, cadmium and mercury whilst also being tested for carcinogenic substances such as vinyl chloride monomer. Furthermore, testing is also conducted for plasticisers, and other organic compounds as well. The company’s raw materials and material formulation processes were inspected by NSF International as well to ensure the safety and compliance of the pipes.

Founded by the late Deshamanya A. Y. S. Gnanam, St. Anthony’s Industries Group is a pioneer of plastic processing since the 1960’s, built on a legacy of innovation and manufacturing excellence. With extensive in-house capabilities and a history of industry firsts, the Group continues to set rigorous quality standards while expanding its portfolio to deliver advanced solutions that earn lasting consumer trust.