SL Real Estate Excellence Shines at 2025 PropertyGuru Asia Property Awards

Sri Lanka’s real estate sector took centre stage at the 2025 PropertyGuru Asia Property Awards, with the International Luncheon at The Athenee Hotel, a Luxury Collection Hotel, Bangkok, recognising the island’s most outstanding developments and design achievements.

The most notable Sri Lankan developer was Home Lands Group of Companies, which took home the esteemed titles of Best Developer and Best Lifestyle Developer. Top honors were also given to the company’s flagship projects: Santorini Resort Apartments & Residencies in Negombo won Best Completed Condo Development, Bayfonte Marina Resort Apartments & Villas in Negombo was named Best Waterfront Condo Development, and Pentara Residencies’ Thummulla Handiya “The Address in Colombo” was named Best Luxury Condo Development (Colombo).

Other Sri Lankan winners were Urbanspace Interiors Pvt Ltd, which was recognised for Best Condo Interior Design with the Pentara Model Apartment, and Groundworth (Pvt) Ltd, which received Special Recognition for Land Investments. These accolades demonstrate Sri Lanka’s increasing proficiency in building luxury residences, lifestyle-oriented developments, and thoughtfully designed interiors.

While Sri Lanka was the focus of attention in South Asia, Middle Eastern real estate excellence was also celebrated. The region’s dedication to luxury and lifestyle real estate is demonstrated by Chedi Hospitality’s Best Branded Residential Development award for The Chedi Private Residences, Sheikh Zayed Road, Dubai.

Commenting on the awards, Jules Kay, General Manager of PropertyGuru Asia Property Awards and Events, said: “South Asia and the Middle East offer investors and end-users alike compelling value propositions with a variety of property types, including luxury branded residences, curated lifestyle concepts, and more. From prime districts in the UAE to coastal cities in Sri Lanka, these markets present developments that take advantage of their location and visual appeal. This year’s winners provide a solid foundation for the next generation of developers to build upon.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.