HUTCH earns global recognition  for transformative customer innovations at International Fast Mode Awards

HUTCH has been awarded the prestigious ‘Customer Champion’ Award – Growth Category at the recently concluded International Fast Mode Awards. The recognition celebrates HUTCH’s leadership in redefining customer experience and delivering exceptional value through effective adoption of new-age technologies. HUTCH has spearheaded hyper-personalisation to a new international benchmark through big data technologies, AI-driven insights, whilst keeping the warm touch of firsthand experiences to build a robust and cohesive customer management strategy. The strategy is delivered with real-time actions at a scale through wide portfolio of bespoke digital and non-digital channels to engage customers, ensuring 100% inclusivity.

HUTCH, a highly trusted brand in Sri Lanka with a long-standing reputation for putting customers first, in recent years, set out to reinvent how customers are understood and engaged with. That includes redefining what an experience means, identifying pain-points, what it takes to create value, and how insights are translated into impactful actions. Hutch has revamped the entire approach, covering the full tenure of customers, creating a frictionless lifecycle right from the start. The transformation encompasses end-to-end user journeys, proactive guidance, ease of access to services, alignment of products, fitting loyalty offers, and customer support mechanisms that match personas, ultimately strengthening value creation and trust.

The world-class evolution has been orchestrated through collaboration of both local and renowned global expertise and is reflected remarkably in key metrics such as subscriber growth, retention, and brand equity.

HUTCH Sri Lanka Chief Marketing Officer Hamdhy Hassen said: “This recognition affirms our ingrained vision for ‘People first’ – not as segments to be managed but individuals to be understood. Our approach has been transformed, placing human empathy at the core, with technology serving as an enabler rather than the destination, allowing us to build a value engine that operates on a scale. We are proud that right here from HUTCH in Sri Lanka, we have been able to set a benchmark to the world on building inclusive experiences that create impact and real value that deliver lasting trust for people.”