Gananath Obeysekere’s ‘foolishness’ and the liberation from complicities

One of the most fascinating lectures I’ve attended is the one delivered by Gananath Obeysekere at the Royal Asiatic Society of Sri Lanka on the Vädda, more than twenty years ago. It was based on research conducted in the Bibile region with H G Dayasisira in 1999-2001. Further research had been conducted between 2007 and 2009. The project apparently was one that ‘envisaged a critique and a follow-up of ‘The Veddas,’ the classic study by C G and Brenda Z Seligmann who believed they were dealing with one of the world’s most ‘primitive’ hunting and gathering groups. The outcome of the exercise was Gananath’s 2002 book ‘The Creation of the Hunter.’

The title has the following rider: ‘The Vädda presence in the Kandyan Kingdom: A re-examination.’ The keyword is ‘re-examination.’ Obeysekere revisits the wild man thesis offered by the Seligmanns and of course his own research a decade or so before. Indeed, Obeysekere’s academic life is essentially filled with re-visitations of one kind or another.

Liyanage Amarakeerthi, in a speech delivered in August 2023 on the occasion of an event where Obeysekere handed over his personal library, the Obeysekere Collection, to the University of Peradeniya, details instances where Obeysekere has challenged received knowledge. For example, he cites Obeysekere’s engagement with Edmund Leach in ‘Medusa’s Hair,’ with Marshall Sahlins in ‘The apotheosis of Captain Cook,’ with Western rationalism in ‘Awakened Ones: Phenomenology of Visionary Experience,’ and with what Amarakeerthi sees as ‘nationalist forces that brought the county down, [by] promoting extreme chauvinism and xenophobia,’ in ‘The many faces of the Kandyan Kingdom.’ One could add to this, ‘Buddhism Transformed: Religious Change in Sri Lanka,’ which Gananath co-authored by Richard Gombrich.

These revisitations certainly generated debate and fuelled much academic forays into the fields that Obeysekere explored. Revisitation of re-examination as Obeysekere puts it is obviously a key element in the social sciences in general and in history and anthropology (and related fields) in particular. Theses are generated by the examination of and reflection on information available or unearthed. Further discoveries compel scholars to revisit theories and make necessary adjustments or even abandon them altogether.

Obeysekere acknowledges the import of reconsideration, even of his own work. In an interview with Jayadeva Uyangoda aired on YouTube in 2016 titled ‘The foolishness of Gananath Obeysekere,’ when he was already close to 90 years of age, the anthropologist admits that he ‘made errors of fact and errors of interpretation.’ He quotes Friedrich Nietzsche: ‘One must be very humane to say I don’t know that.’ He asks (and answers), ‘How many of us are capable of pleading ignorance? I am. That’s why I praise foolishness.’

He eloquently summarizes the dilemmas of the social sciences. ‘Human sciences are vulnerable. The human sciences have an adolescent character. That is, he (Nietzsche) calls it the fate of our times. With these kinds of work there’s a kind of incompleteness. We can’t produce a finished product. All of anthropology is like that.’

He adds, ‘ours, as against the kind of natural sciences, are argumentative disciplines. And as argumentative disciplines they are also vulnerable. You can’t produce some kind of inter-subjective consensus that everyone will agree to. We may claim to be objective. You have to balance yourself, produce your empirical investigations which require evidential support. We are creatures who are basically argumentative. There is truth-value, otherwise we won’t be writing, but truth, as I always say, should be in inverted commas.’

This is why Obeysekere probably revisited his work and that of others. He was relentless. Truth, as received, comes in inverted commas. Unfortunately, there are certain truths which those who champion Obeysekere choose to write without the qualifier, as Obeysekere himself has done on occasion. That’s a disservice to Obeysekere, obviously, and one likes to think that Obeysekere, if such errors of commission and omission, i.e. of both fact and interpretation, were pointed out, would have engaged with such theses in the spirit of the foolishness that he praises.

It is important to examine the truths (without inverted commas) that seem to have pervaded Obeysekere’s work, especially on two important scholarly interventions, his explorations of the Vädda and related and preceding narratives, and his essay on Dutugemunu’s conscience, the latter ‘truth’ being reiterated by like-minded scholars in the social sciences and humanities, again without inverted commas.

‘Duṭṭhagâmani and the Buddhist Conscience’ was an essay derived from a lecture by the same title delivered by Obeysekere at the 13th conference on South Asian Studies at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA in November 1984. It was included in a collection titled ‘Religion and political conflict in South Asia,’ edited by Douglas Allen in 2004. The text was translated into Sinhala in the early 1990s by Sunil Gunasekera and published by the Social Scientists’ Association in the magazine ‘Yathra’ and later in the website by the ‘Kathika Sanvada Mandapaya.’

The truth (or otherwise) presented by Obeysekere in his essay was comprehensively reviewed by Ishankha Malsiri in ‘Dutugemunuge Harda Saakshiyata Pilithurak (A response to Dutugemunu’s Conscience),’ in 2016. Malsiri examines Obeysekere’s sources and in some instances points out errors of omission and commission, especially with regard to the ‘true’ location of Elara’s grave and the purported mischief indulged in by archaeologists, as representative of the state, implying of course some ideological bent and outcome preferences subscribed to by some at the time. He points out the contradictions, inconsistencies, ambiguities and witting or unwitting obfuscations in the text and concludes that the thesis is untenable.

Interestingly, Malsiri includes in his book, as addendum, the Sinhala version of Obeysekere’s talk/essay. Obeysekere’s angst is evident therein, as it is in his work on the Väddas, the contemporary expression of Buddhist practices and the intrigue associated with the Kandyan Kingdom. He correctly and importantly points to the danger of a single narrative and the tendency of such positions to concretise or, as he would put it, remove the inverted commas of ‘truth,’ and thereby argues for a more nuanced, tolerant and humane reading of history, in particular the caricatured versions as touted by the politically inclined, including certain scholars. Nevertheless, Obeysekere cannot seem to divest himself of his own reading of the antecedents of the crises or turbulences he was born into and lived through, especially after political independence was obtained from the British. It is a malady that seems to have infected his ideological fellow-travellers who, interestingly and in contradistinction to Obeysekere’s conscious embracing of foolishness, appear not to have the wider-gaze, if you will, of the anthropologist.

Whereas Obeysekere uses Dutugemunu’s ‘avowed’ discovery of a conscience towards the end of his, Dutugemunu’s, life in order to champion multiple and even contradictory narratives, his, Obeysekere’s, acolytes remain uncritical and ‘un-foolish’ even as they rant and rave against the alleged foolishness (not in the vein that Obeysekere uses the word of course) and even mischievous ways of those who are ideologically and politically opposed to their point of view.

Amarakeerthi, for example, while claiming, probably correctly in the main, that ‘Obeysekere was turned into a national villain in [the] extremely one-dimensional nationalist/racist press,’ and that Peradeniya university produce[d] scholars who argue that Dutugemunu, by extension Sinhala people, has no sense of guilt in their conscience,’ inexplicably jumps to the following conclusion: ‘No wonder that Sri Lanka has descended into the political, ethical, cultural abyss that it is in right now.’ He opines that ‘nationalist forces’ are promoting extreme chauvinism and xenophobia, a claim that can be defended in the case of certain nationalists but not all, but his assertion that it was nationalist forces ‘that brought the country down,’ is a frivolous, mischievous, unsubstantiated and reductionist claim. Obeysekera, for all his problemetisation of identity and pluralisation postulates, does descend to the kind of monolithisation, if you will, that such claims are predicated upon. We shall return to this presently.

Malsiri proposes that Obeysekere’s objective is to denigrate contemporary Buddhist society which, admittedly, Obeysekere often treats as a monolithic entity and frivolously implies is lacking in conscience. In this, as Malsiri points out, Obeysekere is not alone. Malsiri offers a list of academics whose work is premised similarly, i.e. the Sinhala-Buddhist is the villain of the piece not only for what is erroneously or at least incompletely described as ‘the ethnic conflict’ but all major ills that has plagued the island nation for many, many decades. They include Bardwell Smith, Sachi Ponnambalam, S J Thambiah, George Bond, Jeyaratnam Wilson, Stephen Kemperer, David Littleton and H L Seneviratne.

The ontological error is most evident in Obeysekere’s work on the Väddas. The text reads as an illuminating narrative on who was who and when of peoples in the island, pertaining to the Väddas and the Sinhalas and the overarching factor of Buddhism, Buddhist (society) and related othernesses. He not only rubbishes the notion of the Vädda as a wild character as described by the Seligmanns and others, but problematises identity and relatedness of both the Väddas and the Sinhalas in the areas he focused his research on. Obeysekere forces the reader to consider the likelihood that the Vädda-trace, if you will, even if ever they lived in isolation, was not and, as importantly, is not absent in ‘Sinhala’ DNA. Nevertheless, and surprisingly, he is flippant when it comes to the origin of the Sinhalas and, inter alia, the Tamils, in this island.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.