Conference on “Perspectives on Geographical Indications in Sri Lanka”

The Sri Lanka Tea Board (SLTB), the French Agricultural Research Centre for International Development (CIRAD), and the Institute of Policy Studies of Sri Lanka (IPS) are organizing a conference titled “Perspectives on GIs in Sri Lanka”. This by-invitation event marks the conclusion of the Ceylon Tea Geographical Indication (GI) project and celebrates Sri Lanka’s achievements in this field. It will highlight the journey of Ceylon Tea towards the protection within the European Union and explore future opportunities for origin-linked products across the country. The Forum will be held on 16 October 2025 at the Hilton Colombo Residencies.

Since December 2021, the French Agency for Development (AFD) has supported the Sri Lanka Tea Board in its efforts to obtain a Geographical Indication protection for Ceylon Tea with the technical assistance of CIRAD and IPS. This pioneering initiative brought together all stakeholders across the tea value chain in a collective effort to define what makes Ceylon Tea unique, establish a shared conception of tea quality for the sector, and strengthen its global reputation – while reaffirming the integrity of one of Sri Lanka’s most iconic products.

Geographical Indications are signs that identify agricultural and craft products of which quality, reputation, or characteristics are tied to their place of origin. GIs protect authenticity, reinforce consumer trust on markets, and support rural communities and sustainable development.

Since the recent enactment of the Gazette Extraordinary No. 2407/04 on October 22, 2024 which enables GI registrations in Sri Lanka, the country has entered into new era in protecting and promoting its agricultural and artisanal heritage. Ceylon Cinnamon became the first Sri Lankan product to receive GI protection in the European Union in 2022, and the Ceylon Tea application was submitted for registration in 2024. These two milestones mark an important progress and open the door for the future GI initiatives that celebrate Sri Lanka’s excellence and diverse heritage.

The conference will bring together stakeholders from the tea industry, policymakers, representatives of other agricultural and craft sectors, academics, and international partners. Four roundtables will explore the value and potential of Geographical Indications in Sri Lanka. Discussions will be moderated by two internationally recognized experts: Dr. Delphine Marie-Vivien, Researcher in GI Law from CIRAD, who has been involved in GI initiatives in Sri Lanka since 2019, and Mr. Massimo Vittori, Executive Director of OriGIn, the international network of GI associations. Bringing an international perspective, the program will also feature representatives from two renowned GI producer groups: Espelette Chili Pepper from France and Rooibos and Honeybush from South Africa.

The morning sessions will focus on GIs as public policy instruments and drivers of sustainable development, while the afternoon will draw practical lessons to guide other sectors in developing their own GIs and protecting them against misuse and counterfeiting.

Marking the conclusion of the Ceylon Tea GI project, this event represents a new milestone for Geographical Indications in Sri Lanka, celebrating both the achievements of the tea industry and the country’s growing commitment to safeguarding products that embody its heritage, authenticity, and excellence.

CEAT Kelani attains ISO 14064-1:2018 certification for GHG emissions reporting

Direct Kitchens Sri Lanka to design bespoke kitchens for Oceana Villas by Home Lands Skyline

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.