A tale of two govts.

The UNP has taken exception to a comparison made by a website (Manthri.lk) between the initial stages of the UNP-led Yahapalana government under the presidency of Maithripala Sirisena (MS) and the incumbent JVP-NPP administration led by Anura Kumara Dissanayake (AKD) in terms of legislative activity. Both governments came to power by effectively harnessing anti-incumbency sentiments and promising good governance. At the six-month mark, the MS administration led in legislative activity, Manthri.lk has pointed out. It gazetted three times the number of bills, compared to the corresponding period during AKD presidency and had twice as many passed. However, at the nine-month mark the AKD presidency overtook in terms of bills that were passed. By the 18-month mark the score changed. The AKD government passed 12 more bills than the MS administration, according to Manthri.lk.

Arguing in an accusatory tone that the aforesaid comparison, which appears in a Manthri.lk article titled, “Run Rate of Passing Laws in Parliament”, is quantitative and not qualitative, the UNP has said that a number of progressive laws were passed during the Yahapalana government during the first 18 months of the MS government. It has said they include the 19th Amendment to the Constitution, the Right to Information Act, the National Medicines Regulatory Authority Act, and the National Minimum Wage of Workers Act, but the Dissanayake administration has not delivered reforms as such; it has only scrapped some entitlements of the ex-Presidents and former MPs. The UNP has apparently manufactured a grievance to lay out some progressive laws it was instrumental in passing during the Yahapalana. However, what the UNP has left unsaid is that AKD’s JVP was a Yahapalana partner in all but name and pressured that government to honour its promises. Curiously, after being ensconced in power, the JVP has not cared to fulfil its key election pledges.

An interesting picture emerges when the comparison between the initial stages of the two governments is extended beyond the new laws and legal amendments they introduced. What matters most is not the “run rate” or the score as such, but how the game was played, so to speak. These memorable lines from Henry Newbolt’s “Vitaï Lampada” come to mind: “And it’s not for the sake of a ribboned coat / Or the selfish hope of a season’s fame / But his Captain’s hand on his shoulder smote — ‘Play up! play up! and play the game!’” Unfortunately, the spirit of duty and self-sacrifice are not virtues cherished in Sri Lanka politics.

The Yahapalana government carried out a mega racket, the Treasury bond scam, shortly after its formation in 2015, severely denting its anti-corruption credentials. The JVP-NPP administration did likewise in January 2025, a few weeks after sweeping a general election and securing a two-thirds majority. A freight container scandal ruined its reputation; that was followed by a coal procurement scam. Driven by political expediency, both governments unashamedly embraced the very rotten political culture they had vowed to upend while out of power.

MS and AKD secured the executive presidency by pledging to abolish it. But they reneged on that promise after savouring power. MS embarked on his reelection campaign and sought to gain a boost for it from his war on drugs, but the Easter Sunday terror attacks ruined his chances of contesting another presidential election. AKD remains silent on his much-advertised pledge to do away with the executive presidency. His election manifesto, A Thriving Nation: A Beautiful Life, promises to introduce a new Constitution, abolish the executive presidency and ensure that a President without executive powers will be appointed by the parliament, but several government politicians have said AKD will seek a second term. The JVP/NPP has thus demonstrated that it also acts out of expediency and not principle. It is emulating its predecessors notorious for their Machiavellian approach to promises. A common denominator among all governments since 1994 has been the unfulfilled promise to abolish the executive presidency.

Most criticisms of the UNP-led Yahapalana government under MS presidency apply, mutatis mutandis, to the incumbent administration led by the JVP.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.