Stredge rebrands to orchestrate value

Stredge, now into its ninth year, recently marked its strategic rebranding under the slogan of ‘orchestrating value’. The rebranding is a further endorsement of the company’s proven track record of delivering orchestrated value across its cornerstones of People, Process, Technology and Finance. Founded locally with its global headquarters now in Dubai, Stredge had worked with diverse businesses for nearly a decade, navigating operational, financial and strategic change. With the brand relaunch, the focus is on engaging with businesses at a level of ‘deeper integration’, announced the company. The rebranding also reflects the company’s global expansion with the ongoing engagements in the UAE and the Maldives.

“As co-founders, we have immense pride in creating an ecosystem and a growth-enabling culture for all our stakeholders, and we have been able to create value for the Stredge brand to grow organically over the past nine years. Our global presence, our dynamic consultancy team, tailor-made solution-based offerings, and our strategic partnerships are all positioned to orchestrate value in all what we do across the borders. Furthermore, our ability to guide the organisations to plan their journeys for digital transformation and our consultancy capability of bridging the gaps required for digitalisation has given us a real edge in today’s global market,” remark Stredge Sri Lanka & Middle East Directors and co-founders of the company Sumedha Wijesekera and Janaka Epasinghe.

“While our roots remain proudly Sri Lankan, the new brand identity sets a broader transformation ambition. Organisations are increasingly seeking partners who can connect people, processes, finance and technology into a unified transformation journey. And this thinking naturally has led us towards bringing forth the concept of ‘Value Orchestration’, which now defines the essence of our brand,” Stredge Director, Transformation, Waruni Jayawardhane notes.

While the core pillars of ‘people, process, finance and technology’ will remain central to Stredge, the rebranding marks a significant shift in terms of how these will increasingly intersect and evolve. One key area of focus is technology-enabled transformation. “While businesses in the current context are moving from basic automation to intelligent, data driven operating models, we are focusing on digital transformation, operational efficiency, and integrated approach to drive strategy into execution,” Jayawardhane avers. Along with digital transformation, Stredge will also underscore people transformation, engaging in leadership development, capability enhancement and creating change-readiness.

Stredge is also expanding its strategic finance pillar, offering financial solutions across the borders, such as tailor-made financial modelling, business revivals and restructure, business valuations, strategic costing and profit optimisation, mergers and acquisitions and corporate strategy Moreover, the introduction of sustainability solutions, including ESG for the business ecosystem with a special focus on supply chains considering the new world’s norm, marks a significant shift in the company’s product offerings.

A Dutch envoy’s candid message to Sri Lanka: Tea, trade, and the partnership that awaits

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.