Needed: Action not rhetoric

The NPP MPs and their Opposition counterparts spoke at length, in Parliament on Thursday, to demonstrate what they made out to be their disaster management skills. The Opposition sought to teach the government how to handle the current disaster situation more effectively, and the latter claimed that it was on top of the situation, and rescue and relief programmes were successfully underway.

Going by the arguments and counterarguments put forth by the government and the Opposition in Parliament, they were quarrelling over what the state had to do for the people affected by disasters. Neither of them asked what the political parties dependent on the public for survival could do for the people in distress.

Last week, the SLPP brought thousands of its supporters to a political rally in Nugegoda despite the inclement weather and boasted of having staged a very successful show of strength. They must be among those who are crying out for help. The SJB has said it will hold a political rally early next year, and the JVP/NPP has bragged that it is capable of staging a much bigger show of strength than the one held by the SLPP in Nugegoda. All these parties have held huge political events with the participation of tens of thousands of people.

An opportunity has now presented itself for the people’s representatives, in both Parliament and the local government institutions, to show that they care for the people who pay through the nose to maintain them and vote for them generously. The least they can do for the public at this juncture is to mobilise their rank and file, whose numerical strengths they often brag about, in the disaster-stricken parts of the country and assist in the ongoing rescue and relief operations.

Many roads have to be cleared and repaired; thousands of houses, schools, places of worship, etc., have to be cleaned, repaired or even rebuilt. These are labour intensive tasks, which the armed forces personnel alone cannot handle. But they can be easily accomplished if the members of the main political parties put their shoulders to the wheel. Many hands are said to make light work.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has asked all MPs to go back to their electorates and oversee the rescue and relief operations. Parliamentary sittings have been cancelled for two days for them to do so. There are more than 8,000 local government members at the grassroots level. They and the MPs, numbering 225, should be able to enlist the support of millions of volunteers to help the disaster victims and clean and repair the flood-affected houses and infrastructural facilities.

Will the political leaders who wrap themselves in the flag and declare that they are ready to lay down their lives for the ordinary people, rise to the occasion?

President Dissanayake, Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa and SLPP National Organiser Namal Rajapaksa should take the lead so that others will be compelled to follow them. Theatrics, such as walking along railroads in shorts and vaulting over barriers at political rallies, are of no use to the public. The ‘patriotic’ political leaders and their party activists must go among the people in these troubled times. That is the way they can show gratitude to the people. What is needed is action and not rhetoric.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.