Walk For Peace: An Eventful Week In Focus (21st – 28th April) – Part II

Part – 2 : Notable Developments in Strategic, Geo-Political and Socio-Economic Landscape

The second part of the write-up revolves around noteworthy developments in the strategic, geo-political, and socio-economic landscape surfaced during the week from 21st -28th, which are likely to reverberate across the country in the weeks and months ahead, for what it’s worth.

The NPP government has run into unforeseen policy stalemates, controversies and blunders of sorts, day-in and day-out, on a myriad of matters involving party stalwarts and members of the opposition. Noteworthy among them, include the probe into Easter Sunday terror attack, frauds at two leading banks, indictment of a cabinet minister on bribery and corruption charges, resignation of the same cabinet minister and a ministry secretary- amidst allegations over their involvement in the procurement of substandard coal, and among other issues of public concern. On the whole, the NPP government, by and large appears to be in a quandary due to issues and controversies of its own making.

A brief overview on each of those notable cases is summarized below for the sake of clarity.

The most noteworthy was the Easter Sunday carnage, of which the 7th anniversary was marked on the 21st with commemorative events held in Colombo and elsewhere, with the participation of prominent multi-faith religious dignitaries. Suffice it to note, the painful legacy and heart-broken memories of Easter Sunday continue to haunt and traumatise the victims’ families for seven long years since 2019, albeit in the dark – on the perpetrators of this heinous crime.  Hence, the demand for justice and fairplay for over 300 dead and scores of others maimed cannot be understated.  It is reported that the latest investigations have uncovered certain leads on the likely perpetrators, and its so-called mastermind. According to sources familiar with the probe, the police is said to have made a breakthrough with new leads being followed through in coordination with intelligence and law enforcement authorities. Yet the credibility of the investigations is at odds in the face of authorities remaining tight-lipped on the status-quo viz-a-viz new leads and evidence being unearthed. The Catholic Church, meanwhile, has renewed its call for a thorough and impartial investigation on the attack, to which the authorities are yet to respond, and make public any details on the latest development viz-a-viz the alleged perpetrators. It’s a pity that despite successive governments having conducted lengthy public proceedings, witness hearings and testimonies, (through high-profile presidential commissions of Inquiry and parliamentary select committees), alas, no tangible action seemed to have been taken to implement the so-called recommendations. The Archbishop of Colombo, Rev Malcolm Cardinal Ranjith – presided over the 7th anniversary commemorative events on 21st, was heard somewhat perplexed and seemingly disappointed over the ongoing investigation, and the government’s seemingly inaction in implementing committee recommendations, despite its claims to the contrary, casting doubts on its stated policy on the Easter Sunday attack.

The arrest of 22 Buddhist monks at the Katunayake Airport on 26th April was overwhelming and shocking, to say the least. The detection and recovery of a large haul of drugs / narcotics in their possession to the tune of over Rs 1.1 billion indeed rocked the nation. The news of their arrest reverberated across the country, with Buddhist prelates expressing their utter dismay and bewilderment over the appalling conduct of the so-called monks. The chief prelates of three main Buddhist Chapters spared no time in issuing a joint statement condemning the monks under arrest, bringing the sanctity of Buddha Sasana and its custodians into disrepute and shame, while calling on the authorities to take stringent action against the monks involved in the dastardly act in letting down the Buddhism and Sasana in its entirety. Indeed the arrest of monks on narco charges was mind boggling, and that there should be a “whole of nation response” to the disgraceful conduct of monks, and its irreparable damage to the monastic communities within and without, who are being looked upon, and respected as the guardians of the nation. Unless the government addresses this sordid saga in earnest, the Buddhist monks would be at the risk of being subjected to unimaginable trauma and ill-will, thus jeopardizing the goodwill between the monks and the lay people (followers) beyond recovery. For a nation of 22-million people – suffered from 3-decade of terrorism, and on the verge of recovery from near-bankruptcy in 2022, it is beyond words to explain their predicament, and to see that their revered monks have been let down by 22 monks by their sickening conduct – “a fete-accompli and double jeopardy” to say the least. On the other hand, the people of this thrice blessed land have just had their moment of glory and pride – in welcoming Bhante Pannakara Thero who led a sacred walk for peace in the country with a noble message of peace and compassion for millions of people on the island. Guess what, the blessings of the Noble Triple Gem would surely be at the mercy of this nation and its people, and help them stand against all odds with unity and purpose, and rise up to the occasion with resilience and steadfastness – no matter what may come.

Financial Frauds at Two Leading Banks – Mired in Controversy

There appeared to be no end to the government’s woes and controversies, thus earning the wrath of the opposition camp. A case in point is the alleged high-profile financial scandals and scams surfaced recently at two leading banks to the tune of billions of rupees, in what could be seen as a catalogue of blunders involving officials and policy makers. The government of the day seemed clueless on the said financial frauds, despite NPP’s stated policy of zero- tolerance on corruption, bribery and financial embezzlement, and its commitment to upholding utmost transparency and accountability in regard to public funds collected as levies and taxes. The irony is that the fraud at the Central Bank of Sri Lanka is shrouded in secrecy and controversy, for not reporting it for months, though funds are reported to have been siphoned off in late last year. Similarly, the NDB which too is reported to have suffered a revenue loss for over a billion rupees, was in the dark for years, raising more questions than answers.

Government’s Reputation at Stake – A Setback to “Clean Sri Lanka Initiative”

The government and opposition camps are caught up in hostile outbursts, claims and counterclaims in regard to financial misdeeds and failures, and in managing affairs of the state. Alas, the infamous coal scandal has opened a Pandora’s Box, with an intense debate ensuing among the public and the opposition camp alike, accusing the government of corruption and fraud at the highest level, thus calling into question the integrity and credibility of the government and its members. The minister accused of wrongdoing in the coal tender and procurement of law quality coal has been subjected to a No-Confidence Motion recently, which he survived – thanks to the NPP’s 2/3rd majority in the house. Yet another minister was in the news recently for bad reasons, who is accused of amassing wealth, said to be in millions. However, the said allegations have not been substantiated, and in the end, he is presumed to be innocent of the so-called allegations. Adding insult to injury, a mainstream media channel is under investigation over a faked story relayed and leaked on its news channel on the conduct / allegations of the said minister, and his wealth and assets in question. On the contrary, the media channel at the centre of the controversy is being challenged by the minister for compromising and defaming his character and integrity, and is likely to face defamation charges for irresponsible reporting –  in violation of media ethics and broadcasting rights.

Of late, the conduct and performance of parliamentarians – more often than not, led to public resentment and outcry for what it’s worth. The infamous coal tender has sparked a widespread public debate, leading to a chain of events and reactions. Ironically, the minister accused of financial misappropriation in the procurement of coal, has been already implicated in yet another financial scandal, in what could be called a disastrous week for the government. In the midst of all the hullabaloo, the resignation of a cabinet minister and a ministry secretary – citing their innocence, couldn’t have come at a worse moment for the government. However, to the government’s credit, the resignations tendered in good faith, has paved the way for an impartial investigation into the allegations – thus setting an example at the highest levels of government.

In a rare show of force, a group of animal rights campaigners have done the unthinkable – demanding better care & welfare, adequate legal safeguards, moral and ethical responsibility for freedom and protection of animals, both domesticated and those in the wild. They have called into question, inter-alia challenges and drawbacks in dealing with street animals, and their welfare and rights issues of concern, thereby raising alarm on the state of animals and the wildlife, among other issues of concern. In a letter addressed to Bhante Pannakara, his attention has been drawn to the plight of street dogs and animals in the country viz-a-viz Aloke, the one-of-a-kind peace dog, calling him to support the enactment of legal safeguards and animal welfare bills for the protection, care and freedom of animals in the country, which are long overdue. They have also noted the predicament of animals viz-a-viz the lack of care, empathy and loving kindness for animals and those in the wild, with an emphasis on the need to give a voice for the voiceless.

Sri Lanka’s Growth Trajectory – A Clarion Call for Course Correction

Following the NPP gaining ascendancy to power in Sep 2024, Sri Lanka made a steady economic recovery, amid short term economic shocks and fiscal policy challenges, while IMF led economic reforms, debt restructuring, and foreign debt repayments remained largely on track. Notwithstanding, our overall growth trajectory, economic recovery and financial stability, by and large hinge on the country’s exports and FDIs, including debt service payments, and the need for significant growth in the manufacturing and service sectors. However, country’s already fragile economy shows early signs of weakening due to ME crises, impact of Cyclone Ditwah, declining exports and foreign direct investments, viz-a-viz compounded by setbacks to tourism sector and services industry – stemming from disruptions to supply chains, market volatility, global economic meltdown, connectivity issues, heightened security concerns, inflated premiums, high oil prices and demand-supply bottlenecks, among others. Accordingly, Sri Lanka remains highly vulnerable to external challenges, risks and uncertainties, albeit volatility and setbacks in the financial markets across the world. Be that as it may, the country cannot afford to lose sight of its ailing tea exports to Iran and ME countries vs blockade of the Straits of Hormuz, which remains closed for nearly 2 months since the war began on 28th February. The uncertainties in the economic landscape, together with growth and recovery prospects could have serious consequences for the country’s overall growth, and its future trajectory, debt sustainability and repayment of loans in the long term, at the risk of the country sliding into yet another economic abyss.

Notwithstanding all the hullabaloo surfaced during the week ending 28th, the government appears to be in control, defiant and, thus acting as if business is as usual. The government is also in damage control mode – while allaying untoward fears and concerns among the public on mere allegations, and in the act of countering them while claiming its innocence on the contrary. That being said, the diehard NPP supporters appeared to be at odds with a section of NPP stalwarts, expressing their anxiety and apprehensions over the questionable conduct of certain parliamentarians, at the expense of the government’s credibility and integrity.

The government,  in its the crusade against drug lords, thugs and underworld criminals, is upbeat on the successes, claiming to have made headway with the arrest of a number of high profile criminals and underworld figures, as well as busting at least 2 caches of narcotics with a street value of Rs 2 billion within weeks, in what could be called an impressive feat on its war against 3 evils, namely drug lords and mafia, underworld thugs and gangsters and criminal syndicates and masterminds in all but name.

Notable Developments on the Diplomatic Front – A Success Story

On the diplomatic front, the NPP government deserves credit for its overarching thrust of foreign policy and strategic initiatives, which appears to be complementary, and in conformity to the country’s domestic policy interests and framework. The Foreign Ministry is seen to have fully aligned itself with Sri Lanka’s strategic foreign policy interests in the conduct of affairs and diplomacy with its friends and partners abroad in the best interest of the country.  The case in point is the visit of India’s Vice President Radhakrishnan from 19-20, marking the first bilateral visit by an Indian Vice President to the country, while bilateral visits of the Maldivian President, Mohamed Muizzu and that of the President of Vietnam, To Lam are due from 3-5 May and 7-8 May respectively. Such diplomatic endeavors and their success stories would certainly pave the way to further strengthen relations between Sri Lanka and the respective countries for mutual benefit. Though the NPP government has lost some ground on the political landscape within, its global outreach in fact has been widened in scope and character on the back of its pragmatic foreign policy and diplomatic initiatives.

The IMF is reportedly perturbed over the alleged financial frauds at two state banks in recent times, thus warranting investigation at the highest level. These frauds have raised the alarm bells and stakes at the highest echelons of power, in regard to government’s credibility on financial and fiscal management on the one hand, and the urgency to put in place adequate safeguards and digital infrastructure so as to prevent recurrence of such eventualities in future on the other. President in his capacity as the minister in charge of finance has been dragged into an unpalatable controversy at a time the overall popularity of the NPP administration has been rattled, owing to the recent allegations of wrong doings on a plethora of sensitive matters of concern.

Well, it is anybody’s guess as to how the powers that be, and the finance ministry in particular, being the apex body in managing country’s financial and fiscal policies, would be able to restore Sri Lanka’s credibility, and manage damage control and potential fallouts from the recent fiscal and financial doldrums, which could have far reaching consequences on the country’s economic recovery and financial stability in the medium and long term. Unless the authorities address this situation in earnest with the farsightedness and steadfastness it deserves, the damage already done could be too costly so as to manage the fallout. After all, the government’s integrity and credibility in the eyes of the public have raised more questions than answers viz-a-viz Sri Lanka’s future trajectory, prospects, opportunities and risks on its path to recovery in the months and years ahead.

“Our greatest glory is not in never falling, but in rising every time we fall” –  Confucius

*The writer is a retired Ambassador and Foreign Ministry Spokesman. He can be reached at schandrad@hotmail.com