Swiss Govt. provides humanitarian assistance to Sri Lanka following Cyclone Ditwah

In response to the severe impact of Cyclone Ditwah, the Swiss Government has extended comprehensive humanitarian assistance to Sri Lanka for a total of CHF 450’000 – Swiss Francs as part of the emergency response effort.

The Swiss assistance will consist of three complementary actions: Deployment of 7 Swiss WASH/Cash/Shelter experts for two weeks to most affected areas, contribution of non-food-items thought Sri Lankan civil society organisations, and cash-transfer to affected families.

Through the Swiss Humanitarian Aid and in coordination with the Disaster Management Centre (DMC) and the National Disaster Relief Services Centre (NDRSC) Sri Lanka, Switzerland is deploying a Swiss Rapid Response Team of seven specialists from 6 to 20 December. The team will support assessment and response activities in the Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) sector, with a focus on the worst-affected areas in the Central Province.

The team has brought the following specialised equipment: 2 WASH distribution modules, each containing six 40,000-litre water bladders, tap stands, pumps, and tubing; 1 water purification unit capable of producing approximately 5,000 litres of drinking water per hour and 2 mobile laboratories for testing and monitoring water quality.

In parallel, Switzerland is supporting multi-sectoral relief efforts with civil society Organisations.

Led by Lanka Jathika Sarvodaya Shramadana Sangamaya (Inc.), assistance is being extended across the Western, North-Western, Central, Uva, and Eastern Provinces, targeting the most affected Divisional Secretariat divisions with dry rations, WASH support, and hygiene kits.

Simultaneously, through the Jaffna Social Action Centre (JSAC), Switzerland is providing Non-Food Item (NFI) emergency relief to approximately 400–500 critically affected and vulnerable families in Mannar, Mullaitivu, and Kilinochchi. Support includes infant and childcare essentials, hygiene kits, kitchen and household items, temporary shelter materials, and clothing.

A cash-transfer program to most affected communities will also be defined. The Swiss team will explore implementing modalities and partners in the coming weeks.

Through these combined interventions, the Swiss Government reaffirms its solidarity with the people of Sri Lanka and its commitment to supporting urgent relief and early recovery efforts following Cyclone Ditwah.