VFS Global launches Republic of Korea visa services in Sri Lanka

Republic of Korea to Sri Lanka and Maldives Former Ambassador Miyon Lee (second from left), Embassy of the Republic of Korea Third Secretary and Consul Jung Haesung along with  VFS Global Country Manager - Sri Lanka and Maldives Manpreet Singh Arora, at the inauguration ceremony

Starting 21 August 2026, Korea visa applicants can visit our centrally located visa application centre in Colombo for a seamless application submission experience

Booking a prior appointment is mandatory for applicants before visiting our centre for visa application submission

VFS Global, the global leader in trusted technology services, empowering secure mobility for governments and citizens, has announced the launch of South Korea visa services in Sri Lanka through a state-of-the-art Korea Visa Application Centre in Colombo, providing an enhanced visa application experience for Korea visa applicants in the country.

Starting 21 August 2026, Korea visa applicants across Sri Lanka will be able to submit their applications at the new Korea Visa Application Centre in Colombo by booking a prior appointment online.

Korean Embassy in Sri Lanka Deputy Head of Mission Eunji Kang said, “I hope that the Embassy’s cooperation with VFS Global Visa Application Centre would contribute to providing greater convenience and improved services for visa applicants.”

VFS Global Chief Operating Officer - South Asia Yummi Talwar said, “The launch of our Korea Visa Application Centre marks a significant step in improving the visa application submission experience for travellers across Sri Lanka. This spacious, modern, and centrally located facility offers a comfortable and convenient application environment, supported by well-trained customer service representatives who will assist applicants at every step of their journey.

VFS Global has been a trusted partner for the Government of the Republic of Korea for visa processing services since 2011. The company offers visa services on behalf of the Republic of Korea across 5 countries through a network of 7 dedicated visa application centres globally.

VFS Global’s role in the visa application process is limited to front-end administrative tasks only, which include collecting visa application forms, required documentation as per the checklist, and enroll biometrics. VFS Global has no role in the decision-making process of granting or refusing a visa. Decision making on the granting or refusal of visa is the sole prerogative and sole responsibility of the concerned Embassy.

The Korea Visa Application Centre in Colombo is located on the 2nd Floor of No. 657, Dr. Danister de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 09. Business hours are from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Visa application submission hours are from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., while passport collection is available from 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.

Applicants are encouraged to obtain the latest information on visa requirements, fees, appointment booking, and available services only through the official website of the Embassy of the Republic of Korea and the official VFS Global website.

For more information or to book an appointment, please visit https://visaforkorea-sl.com