Colombo Archdiocese urges respect for Easter Sunday investigation following Sallay arrest

The Archdiocese of Colombo yesterday called on the public and political actors not to interfere with ongoing investigations into the 2019 Easter Sunday terrorist attacks, following the arrest of former State Intelligence Service (SIS) Chief Major General (Retd.) Suresh Sallay.

Speaking at a special media briefing, Archdiocese Spokesperson Rev. Fr. Cyril Gamini Fernando noted that Sallay’s arrest is the result of a lawful and independent investigation into the coordinated suicide bombings that targeted churches and hotels across Sri Lanka on 21 April 2019.

“Investigations into the attacks were completely halted during former President Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s tenure. During the Presidency of Ranil Wickremesinghe, too, the investigations did not proceed. The Catholic Church has always called for investigations to find those responsible for the attacks and bring them before the law to ensure justice for the victims and their families,” Rev. Fr. Fernando said.

He noted that only after the current Government assumed office did the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) undertake a comprehensive and independent probe.

“In the last 16 months, from November 2024 to date, the CID has been conducting a detailed investigation into the Easter attacks. Fresh investigations commenced following the Channel 4 documentary on the conspiracy behind the Easter attacks and information revealed by former Secretary of ex-Parliamentarian Pillayan. One outcome of this probe is the arrest of Suresh Sallay,” he said.

Rev. Fr. Fernando stressed that Sallay is currently a suspect and that the courts will determine his guilt or innocence. “We believe there was sufficient evidence for his arrest. He is only a suspect at present. The Court will decide if he is at fault or not,” he said.

He also cautioned against politicising the investigations or making speculative statements. “This is an independent investigation carried out by the CID. Allowing these investigations to be conducted independently is what is good. Otherwise, attempts to disrupt them are seen as an injustice to the victims who were killed and injured in this attack. We request everyone not to obstruct these investigations and to allow them to proceed,” Rev. Fr. Fernando added, urging patience as the process continues and noting that meaningful outcomes are expected.