ICC Sri Lanka signs National Committee Partnership Agreement with ICC Academy in Singapore

From left: ICC Academy Global Head Christine Lim, ICC Sri Lanka Vice Chairperson Stasshani Jayawardena, Chairman Shanil Fernando, and International Affairs and Sustainable Finance Committee Member Dinali Alexander

On the sidelines of the ICC Asia Pacific Regional Consultative Group (RCG) Meeting and the ICC Academy Supply Chain Finance Summit in Singapore, the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) Sri Lanka signed a National Committee Partnership Agreement with the ICC Academy, the educational arm of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC).

This Agreement was formalised on 23 October, marking a major step forward for professional development and capacity building within Sri Lanka’s trade and finance sectors.

The signing ceremony was attended by the ICC Sri Lanka Chairman Shanil Fernando, Vice Chairperson Stasshani Jayawardena and Dinali Alexander, and ICC Academy Global Head Christine Lim.

The core purpose of this MOU is to establish a general framework for collaboration and cooperation, with ICC Sri Lanka acting as the primary partner to promote and facilitate the sale of the ICC Academy’s certifications and professional courses to customers within Sri Lanka.

The partnership is specifically designed to offer internationally recognised certifications such as the Certified Trade Finance Professional and Global Trade Certificate to Sri Lankan banking, corporate and legal professionals. Further objectives of the Agreement include the facilitating training and awareness for local practitioners on international trade rules such as Incoterms and UCP 600 as well as digital trade strategies and risk management.

Shanil Fernando said, “This MOU is more than a partnership; it is an investment in the future competitiveness of Sri Lanka’s trade sector. By working directly with the ICC Academy, we are empowering our professionals with the knowledge and certifications needed to transact globally with confidence and competence. We are thrilled to bring these invaluable resources closer to our business community.”

The partnership is poised to strengthen the overall proficiency and adaptability of the country’s trade finance workforce, ensuring they remain at the forefront of global best practices.