Lankan candidate vies for Vice President post of World Federation of United Nations  Associations

United Nations of Sri Lanka Secretary - General Dr. M.M.M. Rushanudeen

United Nations of Sri Lanka (UNA-Sri Lanka) Secretary - General and Sri Lankan Candidate for contesting Post of Vice President to the World Federation of United Nations  Associations (WFUNA) Dr. M.M.M. Rushanudeen will represent Sri Lanka and Head of Delegates to World Congress and 44th Plenary  Assembly at World Health Organisation Headquarters, Geneva from 23 to 30 August 2026.

Over 100 countries participate in WFUNA participating in the assembly and 7 countries contesting for  the post of Vice President among them are Sri Lanka, Somalia, Iceland, Colombia, USA, Tanzania and  Pakistan.

For the last 76 years of history of the United Nations Association of Sri Lanka, first Sri Lankan Candidate contesting the post of Vice President and proposed by UNA Sri Lanka and seconded by People’s  Republic of China.

UNA- Sri Lanka founded on 19 August 1950 under Patronage by Ceylon (Sri Lanka) First Prime Minister and  first Foreign Affairs Minister of Ceylon D. S. Senanayake MP and UNA - Sri Lanka affiliated with WFUNA in 1951.

In 1946 after the founding of the United Nations, WFUNA, the People’s Movement for the United  Nations, was created, inspired by the UN Charter’s opening words: “We the peoples.” For 80 years, WFUNA, together with over 100 United Nations Associations have worked to strengthen public understanding of the UN, defend its values, and connect global institutions with the people they serve.

Since 1946, this movement has helped ensure that peace, human rights, solidarity, and multilateral action are carried forward by citizens, educators, youth, civil society, and communities across the world.

Sri Lanka needs to win 2/3 Majority Votes from among Members Countries around the world by Election day at WFUNA 44th Plenary Assembly in Geneva.

UNA - Sri Lanka other members in delegation are National Executive Committee Chairman Dharmadasa Vitharanage, Vice Chairman M. D. Lalith Peris and National Executive Committee Member M. J. M. Irshad.

Dr. Rushanudeen is live wire of UNA - Sri Lanka a very senior member of the UNA-Sri Lanka, having joined as a Volunteer since in 1985 and a Student Member and later obtained a Life Membership in 1990. He has been one of the most active members of the National Executive Committee of the UNA Sri Lanka and in recognition of services, from time to time he has been conferred the honour of Honorary Member, Life Patron and also the Most Outstanding Volunteer of the Year. He has also served as Chairperson on many important and vibrant Sub-Committees of the UNA Sri Lanka.