Government won’t implement IMF proposals contrary to NPP policies: Chaturanga Abeysinghe

Colombo, Oct. 5  (Daily Mirror) - Deputy Minister of Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Chathuranga Abeysinghe said today that the government would not implement proposals made by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) if they conflict with the policies of the National People’s Power (NPP).

His remarks came after the IMF called on the government to allow domestic fuel prices to adjust in line with international fuel price movements and to maintain cost-recovery energy pricing.

Speaking to reporters, Abeysinghe said the government was not obligated to implement every proposal put forward by the IMF, stressing that it retained the right to make decisions aimed at providing relief to the public.

However, he said the government remained in agreement with the IMF on key areas, including maintaining the primary balance, increasing state revenue and managing public debt.

“The IMF makes various proposals. We will not implement them if they are contrary to the policies of the NPP,” Abeysinghe said.

He said the government had provided fuel subsidies within the parameters agreed with the IMF, adding that the Fund’s condition was that the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) and the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) maintain cost-reflective pricing.

“There is no obstacle to providing concessions to the people if the government decides to do so. The CPC and CEB are proceeding strongly,” he said.

In its seventh review, the IMF said that, in the event of a prolonged conflict in the Middle East, the government should allow domestic fuel prices to move in line with international market prices and maintain cost-recovery energy pricing while protecting vulnerable groups.

The IMF also stressed that any government support should be well-targeted, included in the budget, carefully costed and time-bound to prevent risks to fiscal and debt sustainability, erosion of public confidence and a reversal of the country’s economic recovery. It further recommended using poverty-targeted cash transfers to protect the most vulnerable sections of the population.