Sterling Automobiles introduces Livan RL8 and Henrey MinCar models to Sri Lankan market

Sterling Automobiles announced the official launch of its electric mobility drive recently. Through strategic partnerships with Livan Automotive and Henan Henrey Automobile Technology Co., Ltd., Sterling will introduce the Livan RL8 and Henrey Mini Car models to the Sri Lankan market in the capacity of authorised distributor.

The partnership marks Sterling Automobiles’ formal entry into the electric vehicle (EV) sector.

Sterling Automobiles operates as the parent company’s specialized arm for sustainabletransportation, leveraging Sterling’s established warranty programs and aftercare network tosupport international EV brands locally.

“In Sri Lanka, we see a growing demand for electric vehicles but also concerns aboutservice support and ownership confidence,” said Ravi Perera - Executive Director of Sterling Automobiles. He added that through their partnership with Livan and Henrey via Sterling Automobiles, would bring proven global manufacturers together with local service infrastructure. “Our goal is making daily commuting sustainable and worry-free for families, and business owners” he added.

Livan RL8 comes through Livan Automotive, a joint venture between Qianli Technology and Geely Qizheng under Zhejiang Geely Holding Group. The local brand ideology of All The Way, reflects the combination of global automotive expertise with intelligent mobility solutions. Designed for modern family life, the Livan RL8 is a seven-seater electric MPV witha driving range of up to 430 kilometres per charge. Supported by the technological expertiseof the Geely ecosystem, it combines comfort, practicality and value as the most affordable seven-seater electric MPV in its category.

A significant part of Livan Automotive’s expansion strategy involves partnering with distributors who understand local markets. Sterling’s Aftercare ecosystem provides the foundation for successful EV adoption and the RL8 will cater to Sri Lankan consumerslooking for reliable, technology-driven mobility.

Henrey MinCar is manufactured by Henan Henrey Automobile Technology Co., Ltd. Foundedin 2010 in Beijing’s Zhongguancun Science and Technology Park. With more than a decade of independent EV innovation, Henrey focuses on accessible, low-carbon mobility designed around everyday life. Positioned as both practical and affordable, the Henrey MinCar is designed for first-time vehicle owners and those looking to transition from two-wheeldeliveries to four-wheel ride-hailing opportunities, with an impressive range of up to 285 kilometres per charge, with fast- charging capabilities. Positioned as one of the most affordable electric vehicles in the Sri Lankan market, the Henrey MinCar is purpose-built for everyday urban commuting, with an estimated running cost of approximately Rs. 4.00 per kilometre.