NSA 2025: SLIM recognises “Ambassadors of Sales” in Sri Lanka

The National Sales Awards (NSA) 2025 organised by the Sri Lanka Insitute of Marketing (SLIM), recognises the exceptional talent and performance among the dedicated sales professionals in Sri Lanka marking its grand finale today. This year’s theme for the NSA is “Ambassadors of Sales,” under the tagline of “The Force Behind the Figures” because sales are not merely about generating record-breaking numbers but celebrate excellence, professionalism as well as leadership.

Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing President Prof. Dewasiri N. Jayantha reiterated, “Among the received 1,200 entries, we observed that there is growing female participation which we find inspiring as this is a much-respected platform that gives visibility among the dynamic sales professionals beyond the boardroom or work colleagues.”

Vice President – Events and Sustainability Enoch Perera, said, “This sales award is not merely a flamboyant ceremony but an inspiring effort for both existing and aspiring sales professionals to participate and further develop their careers.

Vice President – Education and Research Dr. Dilhan Sampath Jayatilleke, highlighted that SLIM National Sales Awards has been officially endorsed by the Ministry of Industry and Entrepreneurship Development for its significant contribution towards “strengthening SMEs, enhancing entrepreneurship, and achieving the objectives of the National SME Development Strategy Framework,” creating an opportunity with a national significance.

Speaking on this year’s NSA, Project Chair Channa Jayasinghe stated, “The transparency and the legacy of the National Sales Awards by SLIM has been an immense opportunity in solidifying sales professionals’ career growth throughout these years. NSA’s credibility has been further solidifying this year in receiving over 1,200 entries.

The judging process is conducted in a meticulously structured manner by an esteemed panel of industry experts, reinforcing the dedication of SLIM as the apex body in Marketing by recognising the utmost dedicated and genuine professionals in Sri Lanka’s sales sector.

NSA 2025 Head of Jury Anil Kumara Meegahage added, “Genuine sales excellence involves creating meaningful value for the clients in understanding their strategic needs while maintaining ethical practices as well as cultivating lasting corporate partnerships.”

Chief Executive Officer Chamil Wickremasinghe reiterated that SLIM National Sales Awards hold utmost recognition as the impact is not only career defining but also being a prestigious platform that forges the seal of excellence not only among sales professionals but also among marketing and business communities, including Human Resource (HR) and leadership teams.

SLIM is respected among the sales fraternity, being the apex body for the industry and having a 20+ year legacy of organising the program with a transparent, structured judging process led by respected industry leaders.