HNB Assurance and Bank of Ceylon sign strategic MoU to strengthen bancassurance offering

HNB Assurance PLC (HNBA), recognized as Sri Lanka’s Best Life Bancassurance Provider for five consecutive years by the Global Banking and Finance Review, recently entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Bank of Ceylon (BOC) to further expand its bancassurance footprint across the island.

Through this collaboration, BOC’s extensive branch network will now provide customers with access to a wide range of credit life insurance solutions powered by HNBA. The partnership is expected to enrich customer experience by integrating financial and protection needs, offering greater convenience and value.

Commenting on this partnership, Lasitha Wimalaratne, Executive Director / CEO of HNB Assurance, stated, “Partnering with Bank of Ceylon, one of the most respected financial institutions in the country, marks a defining step in our bancassurance journey. With BOC’s unmatched reach and trust, coupled with our expertise in crafting innovative protection solutions, we are confident in extending meaningful life insurance to more Sri Lankans. I extend my appreciation especially to the senior management of BOC for the trust that they have placed on us in this endeavour as well as to both teams for their commitment in bringing this collaboration to reality.”

Speaking on the partnership, Priyal Silva, Deputy General Manager – Branch Operations of Bank of Ceylon, said, “As the country’s No. 1 Bank, our focus has always been on creating value-driven partnerships that serve the evolving needs of our customers. By joining hands with HNB Assurance, one of the industry’s leading names in bancassurance, we are able to integrate protection solutions into our service offering. This MoU will undoubtedly enable us to deliver holistic financial solutions that go beyond banking, securing the futures of our customers and their families.”

Sanesh Fernando, Chief Business Officer / GM – Partnerships of HNB Assurance, added, “This MoU with Bank of Ceylon marks a mutually beneficial partnership where both our organizations can draw on each other’s strengths. I certainly believe that by working together, we can deliver innovative, customer-focused solutions that provide real value and protection to communities across the country. I wish to extend my heartfelt thanks to the leadership of Bank of Ceylon for their confidence and commitment in making this partnership a reality.”

Tokyo Cement Reports Steady results for FY25/26 Q2 as construction sector rebounds

Morison’s Paracetol champions child safety at Swarnavahini Children’s Day celebrations

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.