Dulux from AkzoNobel Sri Lanka supports Galle lighthouse restoration

AkzoNobel, the global paints and coatings company and manufacturer of Dulux Paints in Sri Lanka, recently completed the restoration and maintenance of the historic Galle lighthouse, helping safeguard one of the country’s most celebrated heritage sites.

Situated within the UNESCO World Heritage Site of Galle Fort, the Galle lighthouse stands as Sri Lanka’s oldest light station.

The Galle lighthouse is one of the most recognisable landmarks inside the Fort, not just in the south of Sri Lanka but the whole island. Constructed in the mid-19th century, the iconic structure remains a primary attraction for the domestic and international travellers alike.

“Sri Lanka is a country with a vibrant, rich history and heritage and we are proud to support conservation efforts and play a part in the upkeep and preservation of landmarks such as these for the future generation. The project was also a unique one as AkzoNobel is well-placed to offer innovative restoration solutions that can preserve the integrity of the historic structure, while protecting it from Sri Lanka’s challenging coastal climate which requires specialised products, regular maintenance and structural upkeep,” said AkzoNobel Sri Lanka Head of Marketing Upendra Gunawardhana.

Working together with the officials from the Galle Heritage Foundation, Galle Fort, Archaeology Department – Galle and Galle Fort, AkzoNobel worked to protect the lighthouse by carrying out a complete colour wash and protective coating system, ensuring long-lasting protection against the harsh coastal environment.

The Galle lighthouse is exposed to strong sunlight, heavy rainfall and salty sea air and requires products with exceptional durability, weather resistance and long-term protection against severe environmental conditions.

The teams worked to eliminate fungi and contaminants, adding products which help with waterproofing the lighthouse while offering weather protection and durability.

The project utilised a high-durability product suite from the Dulux portfolio, including Dulux Fungicidal Wash, Dulux Interior and Exterior Sealer, Dulux AquaTech Max Waterproofing and Dulux Weathershield Powerflexx.

This restoration initiative forms part of AkzoNobel Sri Lanka’s broader corporate social responsibility programme, which focuses on community engagement and the sustainable preservation of the nation’s cultural heritage.