President AKD unveils reforms to anchor 7% growth target

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, in a pivotal address presenting the National Budget for 2026 in parliament yesterday, announced reforms to dismantle hurdles for Foreign Direct Investments (FDI), highlighted by a firm commitment to evaluate state land for investor use.

“Sri Lanka’s land parcel will be properly evaluated, and the government will determine which lands could be made available for investors bringing in foreign direct investments as making lands available for FDIs has been an obstacle in bringing foreign direct investments,” President Dissanayake stated, emphasising a renewed focus on the investment climate. He pointed out that foreign investor confidence is currently being strengthened as Sri Lanka progresses on its economic stability and growth trajectory.

In tandem with the land policy, the President confirmed that the process of monitoring, regulation, and management of state assets is underway, alongside the crucial amendment of the Strategic Development Projects Act and the Port City Act. He further announced that the State Asset Management Act will be amended in 2026, and the State Commercial Enterprises Act is being introduced to Parliament, signaling a profound structural overhaul of state sector governance. The foundational Investment Protection Act will also be passed in the first half of 2026.

The President underscored the government’s success in achieving state fiscal stability, noting that the country is currently moving towards anchoring an economic growth of 7% in the medium term. Key economic indicators have demonstrated resilience, with the government taking maximum measures to maintain inflation below the 5% level, and the exchange rate being kept at a stable level despite global shocks.

He projected the fiscal strength to hit a historical high, with the highest primary surplus in history set to be marked next year. State revenue, which increased by 900 billion rupees compared to last year, is expected to drive the revenue-to-GDP ratio to 16% in 2025, with a long-term goal of bringing state revenue to the 20% level of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The government also plans to increase state investments by 4%, stressing the need for capital expenditure to be increased while systematically reducing recurrent expenditure.

On the debt front, the President stated that the country’s debt percentage is already approaching the 95% target, and the government expects to reduce the overall state debt to 87% by the year 2030. Foreign creditors have agreed to provide relief based on the progress of debt restructuring. Out of a total debt servicing requirement of USD 2,435 million, USD 1,941 million has been settled, though foreign debt servicing is up by $760 million this year compared to last year. The national carrier, SriLankan Airlines, is also slated for comprehensive restructuring, with its debt – now around USD 210 million) – to be restructured by the end of this year.

The budget allocates substantial funds and policy initiatives to spur investment and trade as follows:

The country received $823 million in Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in 2025.

An additional 1,000 million rupees is allocated for services related to Investment Zones.

A residential visa scheme is being introduced for foreign investors.

Rs. 2,500 million is allocated for investment facilitation, including the National Single Trade Window.

To boost competitiveness, an extra 250 million rupees is allocated for the National Export Development Plan, which aims to connect with global value chains and keep export income exceeding $2 billion per month.

Investment incentives include a five-year tax holiday for investors installing communication towers, Rs. 750 million allocated to encourage startups and innovation, and Rs. 21 billion for Research and Development.

The government has noted that the stock market experienced historical growth in 2025, while unemployment reduced to 3.8% in the first quarter of 2025.

The budget detailed key infrastructure projects to support future growth and social welfare measures.

Rs 1 billion is allocated to redevelop domestic airports in Trincomalee, Jaffna, Sigiriya, and Hingurakgoda, and work on the stalled Katunayake International Airport expansion will commence next year.

The government will establish two new IT parks in Digana and Nuwara Eliya under a PPP scheme, while Rs 1.5 billion is allocated to two state banks to settle contractor dues for the idling IT parks in Galle and Kurunegala.

For tourism, Rs 3 billion is allocated to develop domestic tourism hotspots and fund an international destination campaign, targeting USD 8 billion in revenue and 4 million tourist arrivals by 2030.

On the social front, Public sector employee salaries are being increased in 3 phases already. Social safety net expenditure will be maintained at a minimum of 4%, supported by a programme underway to eliminate rural poverty and ensure the benefits of development reach everyone. The President also announced that the government would provide broadband vouchers to children of Aswesuma beneficiary families.

The President concluded by reaffirming an assurance that the public’s tax revenue is being managed with accountability, moving toward an economic system based on equity instead of privilege.

Showers  above 75 mm are likely at some places in Uva, Southern, Sabaragamuwa and Central provinces and in Ampara district

Rs. 33,600 extra per consumer looms as govt. fast-tracks 10 controversial solar projects

ITAK protests against some pending appointments to Office of Reparations

Timor-Leste’s Suhail Sattar and Yahya Suhail – first father-son duo to play international cricket together

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.