Consulate General partners Tata Group for Rebuilding Sri Lanka Initiative

Following discussions with the Consulate General of Sri Lanka in Mumbai and an on-the-ground assessment in Sri Lanka, the Tata Group has initiated a project to ensure the right to education for children affected by Cyclone Ditwah.

Under the ONE Tata Sri Lanka Cyclone Ditwah and Floods Response Program, the group has committed to 27,000 learning kits to assist children resume and continue their education. The initiative prioritises humanitarian needs including education and health, particularly in the Districts of Nuwara Eliya, Badulla and Kandy, which were among the worst affected.

The symbolic handover of the learning kits took place at the Consulate General on 11 March 2026 with the participation of Tata Motors Passenger Vehicles Ltd. Managing Director/CEO Shailesh Chandra, Tata Sons Group Chief Sustainability Officer Chacko Thomas and representatives of the Tata Group companies.

Speaking at the event, Consul General Priyanga Wickramasinghe said: “This program stands as a powerful symbol of the enduring partnership between Sri Lanka and India that extends beyond mere diplomacy and statecraft into moments of solidarity during difficult times, and importantly it is a crucial example of the impact which responsible corporate leadership can bring into rebuilding lives. This initiative becomes more meaningful when situated in the context of Sri Lanka’s well-known resilience and the high premium placed on education. Given this national focus on education, the supply of essential learner kits to school children is particularly poignant and thoughtful.”

Chacko Thomas reaffirmed the group’s longstanding association with Sri Lanka and underscored their moral responsibility to extend support to the people in times of adversity. Drawing attention to the number of people that had been impacted by the cyclone, Chandra observed that the group had collaborated with their local partners in Sri Lanka to support the education needs of children as an investment in the nation’s future.

Implemented in collaboration with the Government of Sri Lanka and supporting ongoing national recovery efforts, the initiative reinforces the enduring partnership between Sri Lanka and India.