THE PROCEEDS OF CRIME ACT- For whom the bell tolls?

It cannot be gainsaid that without a Proceeds of Crime Act (or a similar piece of legislation with a different title) the fight to eliminate financial crime cannot be won. Sri Lanka’s Proceeds of Crime Act No. 5 of 2025 (PoC) became law on 30 April 2025 and all the provisions will become effective the latest by 30 April 2026, unless certain parts of the Act are brought into operation earlier. With some 150 sections and several annexures it is not the easiest of legislation to read and comprehend. It is also important to note that some sections prevail over the provisions in the Anti-Corruption Act.

“WHEREAS the committing of unlawful activities results in serious consequences and in certain circumstances causes pecuniary and other losses and the deprivation of the enjoyment of property rights by victims of such unlawful activities, the public at large and the state:

AND WHEREAS those who commit unlawful activities do not possess any legal right or other entitlement to enjoy and benefit from proceeds of such unlawful activities, and those who receive or derive proprietary rights to proceeds of such unlawful activities also do not possess any legal right to such property:

AND WHEREAS it is the responsibility of the state to take necessary measures to deprive perpetrators benefitting from proceeds of such unlawful activities and to have such proceeds returned to those who shall otherwise have received the entitlement to benefit from such proceeds:

AND WHEREAS the existing legislation including the Penal Code, Code of Criminal Procedure Act, Offences Against Public Property Act, Convention on the Suppression of Terrorist Financing Act, Prevention of Money Laundering Act, Financial Transactions Reporting Act and the Anti-Corruption Act need to be supplemented by new legislation for the purpose of providing an efficacious legislative framework for the effective identifying, tracing, detecting, investigating, restraining, seizure, preserving, protecting, managing, judicial freezing, forfeiting and returning proceeds of crime to those who are legitimately entitled to such property:

AND WHEREAS for the purpose of realizing the objectives of this Act, it is necessary to vest duties and responsibilities on certain law enforcement officers and to suitably empower them to perform such duties and responsibilities, and also to establish certain statutory bodies including the Proceeds of Crime Management Authority…”‘

Section 33 deals with the statutory duty of certain officers to provide information pertaining to proceeds of crime. This section states that “Notwithstanding any provision of any law which requires a person or an institution to maintain confidentiality of certain information, the officers specified in subsection (2) shall, upon information pertaining to any one or more of the following coming to his knowledge, provide such information in writing to the Designated Officer under whose purview the investigation of the relevant proceeds of crime or the offence has been vested by this Act:-

(b) the identity of persons who may be possessing, having custody, exercising dominion or control of proceeds of crime;

The PoC requires (in terms of section 68) at least the following information to be obtained or matters to be investigated before further action is contemplated:

(a) Manner in which the aforestated property was acquired, came into possession (not ‘position’ as stated in the annexure), is owned or is being controlled, is having dominion and is presently being used.

(b) Nature of the financial resources or other resources used to acquire, posses, own, control, have dominion in the aforestated property.

(c) The manner in which the aforestated financial or other resources were earned, received or otherwise acquired.

(d) Identity of the person from whom the aforestated property was received and the associated circumstances pertaining to such receipt.

(e) If the aforestated properties being held in trust on behalf of any other person the name and the details necessary to identify and have access to such person.

(f) If any other person derives or is due to derive any benefit from the aforestated property name and the details necessary to identify and have access to such person.

(g) If answers to any one or more of the above questions is believed to be with any other person name and the details necessary to identify and have access to such person.

On 12 November 2025 the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development forwarded to the Governor of the Central Bank a communication issued by the Secretary of the Ministry of Justice and National Integration. The communication has to be forwarded to all CEOs or General Managers of Banks of which the majority of shareholding is either directly or otherwise held by the Secretary to the Treasury and all CEOs and General Managers of institutions recognized as engaging in finance business or as designated non-finance business.

However, what is of grave concern is that the communication states that in terms of section 16 of the Act officers who receive information outside the institution’s business must notify the designated authorities and that the failure to disclose such knowledge or information is a criminal offence.

It seems that the above requirement was not given adequate publicity by the Central Bank or the FIU or at seminars organized by various organisations.

Very recently a senior official in a bank who was in a state of panic sought clarification on an urgent issue he is faced with. After the recent floods he had to move into a house in a different locality. His immediate neighbors had casually mentioned that the owner of the very large house down the lane belongs to a so-called drug kingpin. He himself had noticed that a number of luxury vehicles are parked inside and that occasionally a luxury vehicle comes out followed by a convoy of other vehicles. People in three wheelers and motor cycles frequently visit the house at odd hours and his servant had said that parcels are exchanged. The official had come to know from his neighbors that this person owns several other houses and estates and is now on bail in connection with a drug smuggling case. His question was whether he is legally obliged to notify the designated authorities (DG, Commission to investigate allegations of bribery or corruption; and Director-General FCID mentioned in the communication. In terms of section 33 more than 50 functionaries are listed as those who are obliged to provide information coming to their knowledge. Prima facie, the communication under reference goes beyond this list and whether it is intra or ultra vires is a matter for the Judiciary.

Simply because an individual or an entity has an expensive mansion or purchased a new car or engages in other life-style changes reflective of newly acquired wealth, is it possible to always assume that these represent the proceeds of crime even if there are unconfirmed rumors that the individual or concerned entity has engaged or is engaging in unlawful activities as defined in related legislation such as the Prevention of Money Laundering Act or the Financial Transactions Reporting Act or the Anti-Corruption Act? Section 34 of the PoC provides for the operation of various presumptions where the Court has to make a decision on a balance of probability

Underlying the allegation that something is represented to be the proceeds of crime is that there is proof that the individual or entity alleged to have ownership is the true ‘beneficial owner’. This is a cardinal aspect that deserves more serious consideration. A book by the author of this article entitled Beneficial Ownership: The Dynamics of Unmasking Beneficial Ownership in the Fight against Economic Crime is scheduled to be released in early January 2026 and this book sheds more light on some the complexities involved in enforcing the Proceeds of Crime Act.

How Fountain Café tried to bag the Metropole chef after the Chairman enjoyed a sumptuous steak

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.