Job scam in England and Malta: Lawyer arrested for defrauding Rs. 9.41 m

The Special Investigation Division (SID) of the Sri Lanka Foreign Employment Bureau (SLFEB) has arrested a lawyer who defrauded Rs. 9.41 million by promising to provide jobs in the nursing sector in England and Malta.

The lawyer from Moratuwa ran a licenced foreign employment agency operated under the name CMM Travels and Tours and charged a total of Rs. 9.41 million promising to provide jobs in England and Malta in the nursing sector. His agency licence had expired and did not hold a valid employment order.

He was produced before the Moratuwa Magistrate’s Court on Wednesday. Since he pleaded guilty, the Magistrate ordered to release him on two surety bonds of Rs. 500,000 each, and the case is scheduled to be taken up again on 27 January 2026.

A son of a former mayor of Kalaeliya, Ja-Ela, was also arrested by the SLFEB’s SID for accepting Rs. 600,000 to send a resident of Talawakelle for employment in Dubai without a valid permit from the SLFEB, on Wednesday.

During the arrest, officers seized several job applications and visa-related documents from his house. The suspect was scheduled to appear before the Welisara Magistrate’s Court yesterday (16).

Acting on a complaint, a resident of Kochchikade, Negombo, who had collected Rs. 2 million promising a job in Japan, was also arrested for recruiting people for foreign employment without a permit. He was to appear before the Kaduwela Magistrate’s Court yesterday.

Meanwhile, a person, who had been charging money to send women aged between 58-60 years old as domestic workers in Dubai using tourist visas, was arrested by SID officers on Tuesday.

Following two complaints received by the SID from two women who returned to Sri Lanka failing to secure a job in Dubai and the other who paid money but did not get the promised job, he was arrested in Udahamulla.

He was operating a job agency called Methsara Housemaid Services in Beddagana Road, Kotte, and collected Rs. 1.1 million without providing the promised jobs. Officers seized four foreign passports, CVs, visa documents, and other materials. He was also produced before the Gangodawila Magistrate’s Court on Wednesday