Further investigations continue into alleged USD 2 million Airbus bribery scandal

Colombo, July 14 (Daily Mirror) - The Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption informed Colombo Chief Magistrate Asanga S. Bodaragama today that further investigations are being carried out into the alleged payment of a USD 2 million bribe in connection with the purchase of a fleet of ten aircraft for SriLankan Airlines in 2013 from a European aerospace company.

No suspects appeared before court as the principal suspect in the case, former SriLankan Airlines Chief Executive Officer Kapila Chandrasena, has passed away.

Submitting a further report, thr CIABOC stated that since the suspect named in the warrant had died, an application would be made to recall the warrant upon receipt of the official death certificate.

Former Minister Chamal Rajapaksa's son, Sharmindra Rajapaksa and Priyanga Niyomali, the wife of former SriLankan Airlines CEO Kapila Chandrasena, have also been named as suspects in the case and red notices have been issued on them.

The investigation relates to allegations that a bogus company was established in Brunei to obtain a bribe amounting to Euro 1,454,645.54 (approximately USD 2 million) from the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company, a prominent European aerospace manufacturer.

Counsel Udara Muhandiram appeared before court claiming to represent the interests of W.D. Nimal Perera, an Australian resident who is said to be the holder of the bank account into which the alleged bribe money had been remitted.

Responding to the submissions made by Counsel Muhandiram, the Magistrate observed that the prosecution had not yet informed court whether Nimal Perera had been identified as a suspect in the case.

Counsel Harshana Matharaarachchi, appearing for suspect Priyanga Niyomali, informed court that his client was residing overseas and requested court to further consider issuing the red notice on her.

Having considered the submissions of both parties, the Chief Magistrate directed the CIABOC to report the progress of the investigations to court on October 13.