Shan Althaf’s Trinity immortals of 2026

Inter-school rugby season 2026 scripted a story of unmatched quality produced by Trinity College Kandy culminating with the second leg of the 80th Bradby Shield encounter on the 25th of July at the Lion’s Den at picturesque Pallekele Rugby Stadium.  Bradby Shield only in its 80th year more importantly stands as the world’s second oldest inter-school rugby fixture between Trinity College Kandy and Royal College Colombo dating back to well over a century.

Trinity’s fairy tale Bradby triumph of 2024 and the dominant destruction of 2026, had its set of heroes spearheaded by a calm and composed Shan Althaf who finally held aloft the prestigious Shield in his eighth Bradby appearance, five of which were rewarded with player of the match awards. Althaf’s instinct driven deceptive penetrative runs during moments of stagnation made the Trinity side look untouchable and a treat to watch right throughout the season.

Deputy leaders in Nisith Kumarasinghe and senior prefect Udan Wijekoon made the challenges that much easier. Imposing figures of Achintha Jayasena, Minula Yaddehige, Hamza Abdeen, Kevin Weerakoon, Nahil Jayah, Akash Fernando, Sadeesha Weerawansa, Maduranga De Silva, Prathiv Yainne, Rithika Weragama, Dimath Ambepitiya, Bilal Nazeer, Mukshith Shyam, Misala Perera and Vihanga Indusara now becomes a part of Trinity rugby folklore whilst Aamar Malik, Evin Jayasena, Abdul Malik are thrust with the mantle of guiding the schools rugby cradle to continued success.

For purposes of record Trinity overcame Thurstan College, Zahira College and, Wesley College before dismantling Royal College to win the President’s Trophy Knockout tournament. What followed was a nine match unbeaten run brushing aside opponents’ with relative ease to add the League title for a second year running before regaining the prize scalp – the Bradby Shield with an 72 -20 aggregate.

In their quest, the schoolboys travelled to Colombo eleven (11) times during the season and the clinical manner in which the opponents succumbed to the powerful expansive brand of rugby dished out with precision guaranteed a fitting farewell to their guiding force in Principal Rev. Fr. Araliya Jayasundera – an old boy whose eyes were filled with tears at Pallekele on Saturday - A mission accomplished to state the least. Meanwhile fellow masterminds the “TCK Rugby Scrummage” spearheaded by the incomparable Nilantha (NLK) Ratnayake, coaching outfit led by the legendary Fazil Marija and Director of Sports Gihan Samarasekara stood resolutely rejoicing months of hard work and perhaps at the thought of Trinity’s rugby pride being well and truly restored.