Ceylinco Life’s Green Club drives meaningful sustainability impact in first half of 2025

The Green Club of Ceylinco Life has made a powerful statement on environmental responsibility in the first half of 2025, mobilising customers, employees and their families to drive a series of impactful sustainability initiatives that are helping shape a greener, more conscious corporate culture.

The Green Club is a volunteer-driven group at Sri Lanka’s biggest life insurance company, and comprises of like-minded employees across departments, who champion sustainability commitment both at the workplace and in their homes.

Among the highlights of the first six months of the year was the Club’s Annual E-Waste Collection Drive, which saw employees bring electronic waste from their homes, resulting in the collection of 573 kilograms of e-waste for responsible disposal, the equivalent of saving 191 trees. Further reinforcing its commitment to environmental regeneration, the Club continued an ongoing reforestation project and confirmed that 5,000 trees had been planted as at 30th June 2025.

World Environment Day was commemorated through tree-planting activities led by employees across the country, while the Green Club also extended its sustainability efforts to the broader community. At the Ceylinco Life ‘Waidya Hamuwa’ free health camps, vegetable seed packs were distributed to more than 1,200 people in an effort to encourage home gardening and self-sufficient food cultivation.

In parallel with the Green Club’s volunteer activities, Ceylinco Life continued to invest in enhancing the sustainability of its operations. A growing number of company-owned branches constructed with eco-friendly design principles have implemented water recycling, rainwater harvesting and solar energy systems. As a result of these efforts, the company recorded the recycling of 660,000 litres of water, the harvesting of 1,463,000 litres of rainwater, and the generation of 581,984 kilowatt-hours of solar energy in the first half of 2025.

The company has also launched a ‘Sustainability Championship’ in to motivate staff to minimise the use of electricity, water and stationery, and will reward staff at the end of the year based on their performance.

Ceylinco Life’s Green Club plays a vital role in shaping the company’s environmental agenda by creating awareness on eco-friendly practices and driving projects that generate measurable environmental impact. Since its inception, the Club has coordinated activities such as the Company’s Carbon Footprint calculation and audit, the annual e-waste drive, and beach clean-ups that have removed significant volumes of harmful waste from marine environments.

Ceylinco Life said it also plans to begin the next phase of its reforestation project at the Rajawaka Forest Reserve in Balangoda, where the company has committed to the planting of 10,000 trees across 10 acres of degraded rainforest and the maintenance of the area for five years, in partnership with Rainforest Protectors of Sri Lanka.

Serendib Flour Mills spreads joy on World Children’s Day with children of Digana Rehabilitation Hospital

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.