Maxi Rozairo…What a voice! What a legend!

Noeline Honter, the renowned Sri Lankan singer, TV presenter and English trainer, who is now based in Australia, sent us the following, describing her memories with the late Maxi Rozairo, who passed away on 27th December, 2025, age 77.

Maxi, with his smoky voice and distinctive soulful style, had a rich alluring quality that captivated audiences whenever and wherever he performed.

I first met Maxi, in early 1970, when he was singing with one of Sri Lanka’s (then Ceylon) super groups of the time, the Spitfires. I was with the original X-Periments…both outfits managed by Marcy Perera, fondly called “Uncle Marcy” by all of us.

The two groups performed at the ‘in’ place in Colombo, the ballroom in Ceylinco which was the only ‘high rise’ building in Ceylon at the time. This was the gathering place for Colombo’s ‘jetset’ who would flock there in droves every weekend.

Noeline Honter and Maxi: A decade ago, inColombo, after a rehearsal

The Spitfires left for Dubai, on a long-term contract, in 1972, managed by Daisy Perera (“Aunty Daisy”), the wife of Marcy Perera, together with bandleader Chinthi Perera, the outstanding drummer of the group.

I joined them early the next year, at the plush Wagon Train nightclub in Dubai, working closely with Maxi and another legendary singer, Priyanthi Manamperi (later Jalaldeen, following her marriage to the group’s amazing guitarist Raja Jalaldeen).

This stellar group, The Spitfires, composed of some of Sri Lanka’s undeniably excellent, leading musicians, toured the Middle East for seven consecutive years, captivating audiences in Beirut, Damascus, Tehran and Isfahan in Iran, Cairo Egypt, Baghdad Iraq, and returning for repeat performances at a number of these venues.

Maxi was a consummate singer, a true professional, who had mastered vocal artistry, blending his power-packed voice with warm, sultry tones to convey the emotions as the song demanded, and all of this delivered with finesse.

It was a great pleasure to join him on stage, combining our voices for a number of duets we improvised together, not only with the ‘Spitfires’ in the early days, but, subsequently, at an umpteen number of concerts and stage shows in Sri Lanka.

Among my favourite duets with Maxi was ‘Unforgettable’ and our much-lauded version of ‘Beauty and the Beast’, which we performed ‘live’ at one of The Island Music Awards presentations.

The Late Maxi Rozairo: His memories are indelible and will be treasured for a lifetime

I met up with Maxi, and his charming wife, my friend Yasmin, on his final visit to Melbourne, in January 2024. I took this opportunity to chat with him on a two-part interview on ‘Music Matters’, my regular TV programme in Australia, telecast on ‘The Sri Lanka Morning Show’ on Melbourne’s Channel 31.

His response to my question on “the reason why we don’t see him in action on stage these days”, he regrettably gave a final ring to an illustrious career that spanned over 57years…“I hung my boots up 10 years ago”.

Besides being an accomplished singer, Maxi was also a family man, who would have his loving wife Yasmin join us for several overseas tours. I recall that she was, on one occasion, accompanied in Dubai, by their adorable little elder son Keith, who was five, at the time.

The entire group was a family unit, together with my late husband, Kenneth, the latter manager of the band, Kate Sabaratnam (wife of Mohan, who took over on Chinthi’s departure) and others, including Raj Senewiratne’s partner, Kate. (Raj took over from Raja Jalaldeen in Damascus).

Those were exciting times filled with fun and laughter, horse riding by the Pyramids of Giza, the post- performance Scrabble games, the shopping sprees, the sing-songs, etc., etc…Beautiful bonding!

These cherished memories were part of our reminiscences when I was blessed to meet up with my dear friend Maxi for the final time, together with Yasmin, on my recent visit to Colombo, in November, 2025.

We spent the afternoon, on a nostalgic journey recalling the good times, and the fun and laughter, ending with a prayer. My final goodbye to Maxi, in person, was very special, with hidden tears, and one last hug.

Irrespective of whether he “hung his boots up” or sang his final tonic note, Maxi did it all, and he stood tall, and did it in his unforgettable way.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.