Ominous signs on economic front

The government has realised the need for a decisive intervention to curtail the burgeoning import bill, which is a drain on the country’s foreign currency reserves. It has imposed a 50% surcharge on custom duty on vehicle imports for three months. Vehicle prices are bound to increase substantially.

Explaining why the government decided to impose a duty surcharge on imported vehicles, Deputy Minister of Finance and Planning Dr. Anil Jayantha Fernando has said import expenditure has increased sharply to USD 2 billion over the past two months. Letters of Credit for vehicle imports are also being opened rapidly, and therefore instead of banning vehicle imports, the government decided to impose a duty surcharge to manage the situation, he has stated, requesting that the importation of vehicles for personal use be postponed by three months.

It became clear a few months ago that the sheer volume of vehicle imports would pressure foreign currency reserves. The government moved to boost its tax revenue by lifting restrictions on vehicle imports in keeping with IMF conditions, but it apparently did not maintain a balance between higher taxes on imported vehicles and foreign currency reserves. Perhaps, having claimed that it strengthened the economy and built foreign currency reserves, the government did not want to restrict vehicle imports.

Oil accounts for about 20% of Sri Lanka’s import bill, and therefore a strategy to curtail the foreign exchange outflow consists in reducing fuel consumption. The West Asia crisis has driven the global oil prices up and left the developing economies struggling. President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has recently lamented that the national fuel bill increased steeply from USD 98 million in February to USD 368 in April, and the projected bill for May is USD 522 million. He has stressed the need to reduce fuel consumption. This situation has come about due to global oil price hikes caused by the Iran conflict rather than an increase in the fuel consumption by the public. However, there has been a massive increase in fuel imports for power generation.

What the President has left unsaid is that fuel imports have increased because oil-fired power plants have to operate to meet a generation shortfall at Norochcholai, caused by low-quality coal imports. Experts have pointed out that about 800,000 litres of diesel have to be burnt daily to compensate for the Norochcholai generation loss. Strangely, no one has been arrested over the fraudulent procurement of substandard coal, which has not only caused huge losses to the state coffers but also adversely impacted the country’s foreign currency reserves.

If the government hesitates to adopt drastic measures to restrict vehicle imports and shore up foreign currency reserves, it might be left without forex for fuel imports, and queues might return in such an eventuality, with newly imported vehicles waiting near filling stations for days on end, as in 2022. It must stop dilly-dallying and pluck up the courage to grasp the nettle. Most of all, it will have to bring the cost of power generation down.

It is high time the JVP-NPP government adopted austerity measures it promised and curtailed state expenditure while reducing the import bill. India has also experienced a decline in foreign currency reserves due to rising global oil prices, central bank interventions to defend the rupee, foreign investor outflows and global uncertainty arising from the West Asia conflict. Although India’s foreign currency reserves have shown some signs of recovery recently, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has called for austerity measures. They include postponing gold imports, curtailing travel, both foreign and domestic, carpooling, reducing the consumption of imported goods and promoting import substitution. PM Modi has requested the centre and the states to reduce ceremonial expenditure, ensure a reduction in fuel use by ministers, shift more meetings online and reduce the size of official motorcades. Sri Lanka should learn from India.

In 2022, Sri Lanka faced a double whammy—a rupee crisis and an unprecedented depletion of foreign currency reserves. It had to opt for a soft sovereign default and seek IMF assistance because the then SLPP government had played politics with the economy and closed the stable door only after the horse had bolted. Those blunders must not be repeated. The restive horse is snorting, stamping the ground and straining against the halter, again. The time for closing the stable door is now. Otherwise, the current leaders, too, will have to bolt with the horse, the way their immediate predecessors did in 2022, with irate protesters in close pursuit.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.