Venerable Mettavihari Thera

Ven. Mettavihari is no more. I messaged Ven Vajiraramaye Nanaseeha Thera last week to find out what information he had on Ven Mettavihari. I knew he had gone home to Denmark to have a further operation as he had had colon cancer. Ven Nanaseeha said he had not heard from him. Then two hours later, he shared a letter he had received from Ven Mettavihari’s brother to say the Bhikkhu had died. The Ajahn Brahm Society, the late monk was advisor/patron of, also gave me the very sad news.

I got to know Ven Mettavihari from at least two decades ago since he resided in the Narada Dharmayathana temple off Buller’s Road (now Bauddhaloka Mawatha) and I would take morning dane on every 25th of each month. Venerables Mettavihari and Dhammavihari resided in this Centre and once, one of them joked I was getting tied up in Vihari names. I would take fruit juice, cornflakes etc in deference to this Western monk.

I well remember going to the temple with a niece when her brother was terminally ill, so the patient could hear pirit chanted before the very end. A gentleman who wanted the head monk to speak with some people would not be put off although our need was urgent. Ven Dhammavihari, who was just after an eye lens replacement, said he would come with Ven Mettavihari joining him to the private hospital, not at all minding going so soon after surgery and traveling with two women, one driving the car.

On another occasion he came with me to see my brother who was after a mild stroke to speak with him. My brother asked him how his wife was. Replied the monk with a broad smile “I have no wife.” He had renounced his all.

Jacob Jacobson was a successful Danish businessman, when he met a Sri Lankan – Vasantha C – who was training to be an architect in Denmark. They fell in loved and he narrated to me how they overcame family resistance and married after he moved to live in Sri Lanka in 1969. He felt completely one with the island and its people. They lived very happy, she in her career and he designing chairs and making a success of his life.

Both husband and wife were very Buddhist inclined and oriented. Finally, mutually consenting, they joined the Sangha – he as Denmarke Mettavihari and she as a fully ordained Bhikkhuni, residing in Kandy, often at Dhamma Kuta, beyond the University of Peradeniya. This step of total renunciation was taken in 1988.

There are few words that can be used to describe the excellence of his personality traits – extremely kind, compassionate human being, living by Vinaya rules to the letter and yet a very friendly, often given to humour. He was so easy to chat to and even pour out your hear and mind to him. I have, more than once, phoned him and gone over to the Narada Centre to get consolation from him for mental stress.

He introduced me to the Ajahn Brahm Society which he formed with a couple of devoted and modern-thinking young persons who invited and arranged the visits to Sri Lanka of Ajahn Brahmavamso and Ajahn Brahmali from Perth, Australia. Thousands of lay persons and hundreds of bhikkhus and bhikkhunis benefitted from their talks and medication retreats. Because I wrote a couple of articles for the Society, led by Ven Mettavihari, its members came to thank me with a huge cake!

Once I was unwell with flu and could not attend a meeting. The next day he walked all the way to my home to see me. That was a measure of his concern.

Using his computer skills he benefitted the entire world by dissemination of Buddhist philosophy, precepts, pirit via his Mettavahini electronic system. He digitalized the Tripitaka and made the database available to the world. After the 2004 tsunami, him knowing how much children suffered, he started Learn TV to help educate them, in collaboration with the Ministry of Education. As has been said of him: “He ushered Buddhism to the digital era.” “His life stands out as a rare example of innovation, devotion and deep spiritual conviction.” He was a supporter of the Light of Asia Association and helped produce their excellent film Siddhartha.

He would walk barefoot whatever time of day. He once got seriously ill due to an infection caught thus. Ven Dhammavihari moved urgently to his rescue, as he had done earlier when he saw the bhikkhu panting each time he climbed a flight of stairs. He saved the bhikkhu since he was developing heart trouble.

And so this gracious, self giving, so helpful and concerned Ven Mettavihari is no more. We need not wish him a speedy Nibbana because he is very close to that wonderful state of no more births, deaths and suffering.

“When Justice Steps In: The Supreme Court Breaks the Cycle of Ragging Impunity”

Minister Athulathmudali’s skill and application at the Ministry of Agriculture

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.