Mahara prison riots: Forensic inspections begin amid damage assessment

Forces officials to redocument records from scratch, amidst severe staff-shortages

Shelters 4,447 prisoners in Mahara Prison, which has the capacity only to accommodate 991 inmates

Says a significant number of inmates are remandees, with the majority facing drug-related charges

Forensic officials yesterday commenced inspections at Mahara Prison following the violent unrest that erupted on 1 August, while multiple investigations are underway into one of the most destructive prison riots in recent years.

Police said the magisterial inquiry into the incident was concluded on Saturday, while forensic examinations are continuing today.

The violence claimed the life of one inmate, while 10 others sustained injuries and are currently receiving treatment at the Ragama Hospital.

Prison authorities estimate that damage caused by the rioting exceeds roughly Rs. 150 million, although a full assessment has yet to be completed.

The Department of Prisons has launched its own internal investigation in addition to the Police investigation into the Mahara Prison violence to find out the causes that triggers the unrest and whether there was any outside influence.

Commissioner of Prisons and Spokesman A.C. Gajanayake told Daily FT that some of the prison’s most critical facilities had been either destroyed or severely damaged.

“The kitchen has been completely destroyed. The biggest damage is to the boiler system, which was deliberately set on fire,” he said.

The prison hospital also suffered extensive damage, with the Outpatient Department (OPD), drug stores and dental unit completely destroyed, including the costly dental chair. Roofs of several buildings were also damaged after inmates hurled stones during the violence, he said.

According to Gajanayake, the prison library, Chief Jailor’s office and other facilities like workshops were set ablaze, destroying computers and records relating to inmates under the home leave and licence schemes.

A newly-established rehabilitation office, which was opened only on the same day with foreign funding through the Prison Welfare to conduct rehabilitation program for inmates, was also completely destroyed.

He said that the prison’s office, which maintained records relating to disciplinary action and inmate transfers, was reduced to ashes, forcing officials to redocument records from scratch.

“The prison industries section also suffered heavy losses. Machinery used for weaving, woodwork and garment production, much of it donated through United Nations-funded projects, was either burnt or vandalised,” he claimed.

“The weaving unit has been completely reduced to ashes,” Gajanayake said, adding that the total financial loss is yet to be determined because the value of specialised equipment, including the dental chair and industrial machinery at the tailoring and wood work units of the prison, has not yet been assessed.

Although inmates had damaged cell doors during the unrest, repairs are already underway to provide them accommodation.

According to Gajanayake, cooked meals are being supplied daily from the Colombo Remand Prison while medicines are being brought in from outside institutions to ensure continuity of healthcare services.

Although some records may be available at Prison Headquarters, officials now face the enormous task of recreating documentation relating to inmate rehabilitation programs under severe staff shortages. He confirmed that the prison’s inmate registration office remained unharmed during the unrest.

“It is unfortunate that the inmates destroyed facilities that had been established for their own benefit,” Gajanayake said.

He said that 104 inmates have been transferred to the Dumbara, Welikada, Boossa, Kalutara, Badulla, Batticaloa and Polonnaruwa prisons following the unrest while all remaining inmates continue to be housed at Mahara Prison remaining cells, which were not damaged.

According to Prison Department data, Mahara Prison, which has the capacity only to accommodate 991 inmates, is sheltering 4,447 prisoners.

He noted that a significant proportion of inmates at Mahara Prison are remandees, with the majority facing drug-related charges.