First Capital strengthens youth financial literacy by empowering 1,000+ students

First Capital Holdings PLC, a subsidiary of JXG (Janashakthi Group) and a pioneering full-service investment institution continues to strengthen its commitment to building a financially empowered nation. This commitment is driven through Invest-ED, a structured financial literacy initiative launched in 2024 with a focus on equipping Sri Lanka’s youth with essential investment knowledge and practical financial skills.

Designed to bridge the gap between academic learning and real-world financial decision-making, Invest-ED is centred on preparing the next generation for financial independence by helping them understand not just why they should invest, but how, where, and what to invest in based on their individual goals, risk appetite and financial outlook.

At its core, Invest-ED recognises that financial freedom begins with informed decision-making. The initiative educates students on investment fundamentals while encouraging early participation in wealth-building, tailored to different investor profiles such as risk-averse individuals, long-term planners, or short-term opportunity seekers.

The programme is delivered through interactive, one-hour university-based seminars, conducted at universities. Sessions are led by industry professionals including First Capital fund managers, equity market experts, and research analysts, who engage directly with students to understand their interests, aspirations and concerns. Using practical examples and relatable language, presenters simplify complex investment concepts and demonstrate how early and informed investing can shape long-term financial outcomes.

Allianz commits €200,000 for post flood recovery in Sri Lanka, part of €600,000 regional relief for Southeast Asia

Koaloo.Fi and Stredge forge strategic partnership to offer businesses sustainable supply chain solutions

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.