National Youth Innovation Challenge launched to mark World Food Day

From left: Dihan Hettige - Assistant FAO Representative (Administration), Vimlendra Sharan -  FAO Representative for Sri Lanka and the Maldives, Damith Pallewatte - Managing Director of Hatton National Bank PLC, Priyanka Wijayaratne - Senior Vice President / Chief Sustainability Officer HNB, Deepal Udukumbura - Vice President of Agribusiness HNB and Shanel Perera - Assistant Manager, Sustainable Business after the signing ceremony

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), in partnership with the Ministry of Education, Higher Education and Vocational Education and Hatton National Bank (HNB), launched the World Food Day 2026 Youth Innovation Challenge, a nationwide competition that invites university students to develop innovative solutions to address some of Sri Lanka’s most pressing agrifood systems challenges.

World Food Day is observed annually on 16 October to commemorate the founding of FAO in 1945. Celebrated in more than 150 countries, it raises awareness of the importance of food security, nutrition and sustainable agrifood systems while promoting collective action to ensure healthy diets for all.

Held under the World Food Day 2026 theme, “Innovate Today – Nourish Tomorrow,” the initiative seeks to harness the creativity, knowledge and entrepreneurial spirit of young people to generate practical, scalable solutions that contribute to more efficient, resilient and sustainable agrifood systems.

The challenge is being implemented with the support of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Land and Irrigation; the Ministry of Fisheries, Aquatic and Ocean Resources; the Ministry of Environment; the Ministry of Health and Mass Media; and the Ministry of Science and Technology. Technical collaborators include TRACE Expert City, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the Sri Lanka Inventors Commission (SLIC), the Sri Lanka Agripreneurs Forum (SLAF), the Institute of Food Science and Technology Sri Lanka (IFSTSL), the National Innovation Agency (NIA), and Square Hub as the technical and facilitation partner.

“Our universities are home to talented young people with the creativity, knowledge and determination to solve some of our country’s most pressing challenges,” said Prime Minister and Minister of Education, Higher Education and Vocational Education, Dr Harini Amarasuriya.

“Through the World Food Day Youth Innovation Challenge, we are creating opportunities for students from diverse disciplines to apply their learning to real-world problems while strengthening innovation and entrepreneurship across higher education. We hope this initiative will inspire the next generation of innovators to contribute meaningfully to building a more resilient, sustainable and food-secure Sri Lanka.”

The Youth Innovation Challenge will provide a national platform for multidisciplinary student teams from state and private universities and higher education institutes to develop solutions responding to real-world challenge statements in agriculture, fisheries, livestock, environment, climate resilience, food security and nutrition.

Speaking on the Youth Innovation Challenge Damith Pallewatte, Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer of Hatton National Bank PLC said, “At HNB, we believe young people have the potential to transform ideas into practical solutions, that create lasting value for society. We are proud to partner with FAO and the Government of Sri Lanka on this initiative, which empowers university students to develop innovations that can strengthen agriculture, food systems and rural livelihoods, that is vital to the economy of Sri Lanka, while fostering a culture of entrepreneurship and problem-solving.”

“The future of Sri Lanka’s agrifood systems depends on innovation and on the energy and creativity of young people,” said Vimlendra Sharan, FAO Representative for Sri Lanka and the Maldives. “Through this challenge, FAO and its partners are creating opportunities for students to transform ideas into practical solutions that can contribute to more resilient, sustainable and inclusive agrifood systems while supporting national development priorities.”

The competition will be conducted through a multi-stage process beginning with a nationwide call for concept notes. Following an initial evaluation, approximately 25 teams will be invited to participate in an online pitching round, from which the top 10 teams will be selected to develop prototypes with mentorship from technical experts and industry partners.

The finalists will present their prototypes during the national World Food Day 2026 celebrations, where the top five teams will pitch their innovations before a panel of judges and potential investors. The top three teams will receive cash awards, while all finalists will gain national recognition and opportunities to connect with government, academia, development partners and the private sector.