A star … on stage,radio and TV

Shareefa Thahir has zoomed into the spotlight, in a big way, as a radio personality, TV presenter, news anchor … and as a compere, as well.

This extremely talented personality has been in broadcasting for about 19 years now, and it’s been both her full-time career and her passion, she says.

Shareefa works at the Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation (SLBC), where she produces and presents a mix of programmes — from live morning shows and musical features to an interview-based show, called ‘It’s My Life,’ which features well-known personalities from different fields.

She is also a news anchor and programme presenter on Channel Eye of the Sri Lanka Rupavahini Corporation and says she is extremely grateful to Rupavahini for all the opportunities given to her.

“I also work as a compere for national and corporate events, which has given me the opportunity to host many memorable occasions,” says Shareefa who has a strong presence on social media, with a large following that’s drawn to her engaging personality and updates.

What’s more, over the years, she has received recognition for her work, including the Raigam Best Television Presenter Award and the State Award for Best Morning Show Host (Radio).

More recently, she started mentoring aspiring presenters, sharing tips and insights on her social media platforms, and conducting interactive workshops on announcing, presentation, and public speaking.

“It’s something I really enjoy, and I hope to continue doing more of it — helping young voices find their confidence behind the mic, and on screen.”

Shareefa describes herself as driven, creative, and curious. She’s also emotional and deeply affected by injustice.

“Radio will always be at the heart of what I do, but my goal is to keep evolving — using my experience to inspire, teach, and continue connecting with people through both radio and television.”

Shareefa Thahir is, indeed, a multifaceted personality who has made a name for herself in Sri Lanka’s media industry while pursuing her passions and interests.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.