Arpico Mattress Achievers Night 2025  celebrates year of milestones and success

Richard Pieris and Company Director Viville Perera addresses the gathering

Richard Pieris and Company Managing Director – Foam Sector Lalith Wijeyesinghe, commences Arpico Mattress Achievers Night 2025 with opening remarks

Arpico has recently hosted Arpico Mattress Achievers Night 2025, an award ceremony celebrating a year of collaboration and outstanding shared achievements with local entrepreneurs, businesses, and company staff members.

Occupying a special place on Arpico’s event calendar for the Foam Sector, the event appreciates and rewards collaborators for accumulating impressive sales. Held at Cinnamon Life at City of Dreams, the awards ceremony recognised the efforts of 150 dealers, with target awards categorised into Platinum, Gold, Silver, and Bronze tiers. These accolades were awarded to the company’s star performers in recognition of their exceptional sales and revenue generation within their respective territories. The awards also highlighted excellence in customer service.

Additionally, this year’s edition included sponsored international tours alongside its sales awards. The Bronze category, whose accolades were based on achievement, offered the winners tours of Malaysia or Bangkok. Similarly, the Silver category, based on sales achievements, awarded tours in Bangkok, Pattaya, and Dubai. Meanwhile, the tour allocated to the Gold category included the Philippines while the Platinum award offered tours of Austria, Hungary, and Dubai.

Richard Pieris and Company PLC Director Viville Perera said, “As our portfolio continues to expand, we recognise the crucial role played by our partnerships and collaborators. Just as they upscale efforts in ensuring customers receive improved access to products, we recognise the importance of celebrating their work of delivering our products to a wider customer base. These awards not only recognise and support their continued professionalism and commitment but also reaffirm how much we value our partnerships.”

Arpico Mattress Achievers Night reaffirmed the company’s standing as a trailblazer within the local industry, drawing attention to its many achievements across 2025. Key milestones in Arpico’s journey this year included the introduction of Englander International, delivering globally recognised US mattress technology to the people of Sri Lanka, and the unveiling of Arpico NextGen, a first-of-its-kind mattress design with air cooling pocket technology, to the local market. These achievements demonstrate Arpico’s commitment to developing locally rooted and globally inspired products.

Richard Pieris and Company PLC Managing Director – Foam Sector Lalith Wijeyesinghe added, “Under the guidance of Dr. Sena Yaddehige, our Chairman, Managing Director, and CEO of Richard Pieris and Company PLC, we’ve established a solid foundation that lets us strategically map a future of new opportunities and potential within the sector. With our visionary leader driving our progress, we will continue to leverage the latest advancements in technological innovation just as we modernise and expand our diversified collection of products.”

From left: Arpitech Area Sales Supervisor Tharaka Perera, Kanthi Distributors Ahangama Owner Aruna Shantha, Arpitech Assistant Production Manager Shashini Wijesundara, Arpitech Head of Marketing – Foam Sector Derrick Perera, Arpitech Deputy General Manager – Manufacturing Jayanatha Alwis, Richard Pieris and Company Director Viville Perera, Seetha Holdings Managing Director Lakshman Premachandra, Arpitech Area Sales Manager Sriyan Sanjeewa, Arpitech Business Promotion Officer Mahesh Prassanna, Arpitech Area Sales Coordinator Priyantha Samaraweera, Richard Pieris and Company Managing Director – Foam Sector Lalith Wijeyesinghe, Arpitech Deputy General Manager –Sales Pradeep Jayaweera