An episode of food poisoning and dangers of weak English speakers at international events

Having remained Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Higher Education under the new CBK government despite Mrs. Bandaranaike’s efforts to get me back as Secretary/Prime Minister), on November 23, I joined a delegation leaving for the Commonwealth Education Ministers Conference in Islamabad, Pakistan.

The delegation was led by the Deputy Minister Professor Wiswa Warnapala and had Dr. Premadasa Udagama former Secretary to the Ministry and at the time, the Director General of the National Institute of Education, Mr. Philip Senaratne, Deputy Director General of Education and another senior officer from the NIE, besides myself.

This conference was trying out the innovation of mixing Ministers and senior officials at joint meetings for the first time. Previously Ministers and officials met separately. These joint meetings were organized in a series of what were called Round Table meetings which were to discuss substantive issues such as the quality of education, relevance, accessibility and so on. They were also due to discuss regional developments and trends.

The Round Table to which I was assigned was to be chaired by Lord Lucas the leader of the British delegation. I was entrusted with the responsibility of making a presentation on the topic of “Educational Development in the SAARC Region,” on behalf of the region. There were separate presentations on behalf of ASEAN, the Caribbean community and other important regions. This involved a deal of preparation and getting my facts and figures in relation to seven countries of the South Asian region right and also comment on deficiencies and weaknesses, diplomatically and tactfully.

It had to be a meaningful presentation, but the possible sensitivities of seven countries had to be borne in mind. I had an early dinner, the night before the presentation and worked on finalizing the material till about 1.30 a.m. At last, being satisfied I went to sleep, but kept tossing and turning. I attributed it to my mind being over active, after over a four hour period of unbroken intense concentration. But it turned out to be something far worse – food poisoning.

From about 3 a.m. I started purging and vomiting. Fortunately, I was armed with some medicine for such eventualities and took it. After about three hours, matters settled. By morning I had slept very little and was feeling quite weak. The saving grace was that the stomach had settled. Although I was getting a little hungry towards 8 a.m. I decided to starve, having only a cup of plain tea. The Round table was starting at 2.30 p.m. and I could just not afford to take a chance on any recurrence of the night’s problems.

I attended the plenary sessions in the morning and by lunch time was quite hungry. But with an early afternoon meeting looming I decided to continue the starvation diet, restricting myself to a little toast. The feeling of weakness continued, but it was better than the possible alternative.

The afternoon’s presentation went off quite well and led to an interesting discussion. It was a great relief when it was over. I was also pleased that it had the full approval of those SAARC colleagues who were present at this Round Table. The Conference itself was both interesting and educational, with some very good reports and background papers being made available to the delegates.

There was a heated debate on the role of Non Governmental Organizations (NGOs.) in education. The Ministers recognized their importance and the constructive role that they could play, but were very critical of the penchant of some of them and their attempts to dictate terms to governments. The Ministers were of the view that the NGOs should not think that they are governments. The consensus was that they could certainly be partners but on issues of policy and working mechanisms they would have to be subordinate to the will of elected governments.

The conference also highlighted the issue of the importance of English at these meetings. The Minister of Education of Pakistan, as was customary, was unanimously elected as Chairman of the conference, since he was the Minister of Education of the host country. Three Vice Chairmen were also elected to represent the Asia/Pacific, Africa and the Caribbean. They were the Ministers from Bangladesh; Zimbabwe and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.

The Pakistan Minister, an amiable personality and a generous host was not fluent in English. He got through the few formalities at the opening of the conference, and thereafter the three Vice Chairmen ably directed proceedings. They had different styles but were all fluent and witty. But the reckoning came at the final sessions of the conference, where it was a convention that the Chairman personally presides.

There is always an important agenda for these final sessions including agreeing on and adopting the final conclusions of the conference. This required diplomacy, tact, a mastery of the agenda, good communication and a degree of finesse. The Pakistani Minister had a good personality, but his weakness in spoken English soon became evident to the point of embarrassment. Sir Humphrey Maude the Deputy Secretary General of the Commonwealth, the Senior Commonwealth Secretariat Officer at the conference, delicately and tactfully took over, giving the Minister a place whenever possible and inquiring at the relevant times whether the Minister would agree with a particular formulation or decision. To these questions, the Minister needed only to say “Yes.”

That is how the meeting proceeded. Most of us felt sorry for the Minister. But no country should send a delegate to an international conference unless that delegate was proficient in one of the working languages of that conference. In the present instance, there was only one working language -English.

Chairman, Janasaviya Trust Fund, later named National Development Trust Fund

Before I left for Islamabad, I was appointed as the Chairman of the Janasaviya Trust Fund, later to be called the National Development Trust Fund. This appointment was made by the new Prime Minister (CBK), who was also Minister of Finance. The Trust came under the overall supervision of the Finance Ministry. When this appointment was made, my first instinct was to decline it.

This was for the reason that as Secretary, Education and Higher Education I was back on the numerous Boards, Councils and Societies which I had already referred to in another chapter. In addition, I had done an assessment of the overall situation in education and was alarmed by what I saw. We were spending only about 2.7 percent of GDP on the entire sector which was therefore being significantly under funded.

With an on going war and the competing claims of other Ministries and Agencies, resources were hard to find. The large bill for the new teachers salaries meant we were going to have cuts on equipment and various other quality inputs. We needed, as quickly as possible to upgrade the human resources in the sector, Teachers, Principals and Education Administrators. All these required money which the budget was unlikely to provide. My colleagues in the Treasury had briefed me in confidence as to the real situation. Some of the training had to be done abroad, and was costly.

At the time when all these problems were looming, some of our main foreign funded projects were also about to end. It was clear to me that there was an urgent imperative of finding further cheap funding from abroad for sustaining the education sector. Therefore, already, I had got down to talk to the multi-lateral agencies. Assisted by the Department of External Resources we were talking to the World Bank which had shown an interest in funding a major teacher training project and with much persuasion and due to our credibility and previous record, an additional General Education Project, to be called GEP 11, to succeed the original GEP I, which was about to end.

Although technically these negotiations were for a loan, in reality since we were negotiating under IDA terms, whatever amount we received when discounted over a 40 year repayment period would in effect be tantamount to a grant of about 90 per cent of the amount. The terms we were negotiating for were, 40 year repayment period, 10 years grace before the first payment and just a service charge of 0.75 per cent.

With all this work, I was not at all keen to be Chairman of the NDTF. But several of my friends with whom I discussed this matter all urged that I accept it. Their argument was that this was the Prime Minister’s wish, (the Presidential Election had not yet taken place,) and that it would be inadvisable to turn it down, however busy I was. They cautioned me about even the possibility of a misunderstanding occurring if I declined the appointment.

I therefore, took their advice and proceeded with what had to be done there. This responsibility came to me at a time when much had to be done. There were changes in senior positions in the Trust as a result of a Cabinet decision. The project itself was tapering off. The usual interruptions that occur when there is a change of government were taking place. In due course the government appointed a committee to study and report on the functioning of the Trust before their time.

This too led to an element of paralysis in the staff. The lack of a full time Managing Director was being felt. We had a succession of officers who acted as Managing Director, who already had heavy and substantive responsibilities elsewhere. In the end, towards 1996/97, arrangements had to be made to carry out the government directive of closing down the Trust office, at the end of the project period. This involved issues and disputes on staff compensation and legal issues involving the Attorney General’s Department, the Labour Department, and the Labour Tribunal. In the meantime, in the midst of all these problems whatever steps possible had to be taken to carry on the work of the Trust. Altogether this was not a smooth or easy period.

On December 19, I had to chair the SAARC Technical Committee on Education at the Hotel Hilton and later host a dinner for the delegates. The meeting proceeded smoothly. The spirit of co-operation displayed by the seven countries was commendable.

The year 1995 started with the intervention made necessary by a serious clash between the school boys and the supporters of Royal College and Ananda College, two leading schools in the island. The clash occurred at the annual cricket match between the two schools. The situation became dangerous when as an aftermath to this incident, pupils of the two schools began to assault each other at bus stands and even inside buses. As usual there were other elements waiting in the wings to exploit this situation and there was the prospect of this problem spreading to some of the other schools. I had to summon a meeting of the two Principals. ‘They, along with parents and the old boys’ unions managed to bring matters under control, within a reasonable time, but not before some anxious moments.

The Indika Gunawardene Committee on Problems in the University System

The University system continued to be seriously disturbed with a spillover of matters which I have already alluded to in the previous, chapter. Added to the problems already existing was the demand for better salaries by both the academic and non-academic staff. Therefore, on April 17, 1995, the President, Mrs. Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga appointed a Presidential Committee to study and report on the relevant matters. The terms of reference given to the committee were very broad and were as follows:

(A) To identify problems that have arisen in the University system and make recommendations within a month, and (B) To discuss with the following groups in all universities on the problems that have arisen in each sector of the universities and take their demands also into consideration before making recommendations (i) Academic staff. (ii) Non-academic staff, and (iii) Students.

1. Hon. Indika Gunewardene, Minister of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (Chairman), Hon. S.B. Dissanayake, Minister of Youth Affairs, Sports and Rural Development, Hon. Wiswa Warnapala, Deputy Minister of Higher Education, Hon. Dilan Perera, Member of Parliament, Badulla District

Mr. M.D.D. Pieris,, Secretary, Ministry of Education and Higher Education, Mr. T.A. Sumanatissa, Senior Assistant Secretary, Presidential Secretariat, and Mr. C. Abeygunawardena, Additional Secretary/Higher Education, Secretary to the Committee.

The committee met on 15 occasions and 87 memoranda were received from academic and non-academic staff and students of Universities in response to an appeal made through the media. Some 27 trade unions, federations, student groups from all universities and bodies such as the committee of Vice Chancellors and Directors of Institutes made oral representations before the committee. Minister Indika Gunewardene, proved to be a practical, efficient and firm chairman.

Some trade unions attempted to resort to half baked Marxist arguments which Mr. Gunewardena, the veteran communist party member and trade union leader demolished with verve and relish. Their militancy based on inadequate and undigested bits and pieces of Marxism collapsed like a punctured balloon. Minister S.B. Dissanayake, Deputy Minister Wiswa Waranpala and MP Dilan Perera were all very effective in tackling the many political issues that came up. They, together with the Chairman, constituted a formidable political team. In the end the committee sent both an interim report and a final report of 62 pages along with a further 29 pages of annexures to the President in early July 1995.

As could be imagined, Mr. Abeygunawardena and I in particular, had to undertake a great deal of reading and preparation in order to brief the political team. Our somewhat detailed knowledge of the issues and problems as well as our ability to draw from a wider area of experience and reference outside the Higher Education sector also helped in a difficult process of debate and discussion. As always one had to somehow squeeze in the necessary extra time for the work of the committee whilst coping fully with the extensive day to day work of the Ministry.

Amidst all this, there was a delicate problem that suddenly confronted me at the time the final report was being drafted. Some of the political actors on the committee had included a strong statement on the alleged misdeeds of the previous government in the sphere of higher education. Some of the sentiments expressed, and the language in which they were couched bordered on virulence. Objectively viewed, these “purple patches” had no great relevance to the current environment.

There was of course an element of history in any matter. But conversion of this into political diatribe was another matter altogether. Therefore, when I saw these draft passages, I went up to the Chairman, Minister Indika Gunewardene. I told him, that as a public servant, I had serious problems about putting my signature to a document containing political polemic of this order. The Minister smiled broadly and said in his slight drawl of his, “I thought you would have problems.”

He was both decent and generous. He told me, “You alter it in any manner that you would be comfortable with.” It was clear that Minister Gunewardene had had little to do with the paragraphs in question. I now amended, deleted and re-drafted certain sections. When the final draft came to be considered some of the other political members objected. They wanted to know who had altered the original draft. They stated that the paragraphs as amended did not convey their strong sentiments. They wanted the original paragraphs reinstated.

The Chairman explained the circumstances and his giving me permission to do the alterations. But those opposed continued to express their unhappiness. One of them told me, “Just because you are there, you can’t stop us from saying what we want.” I said I had no such intention. As far as I was concerned, they were free to write whatever they wanted. However my problem I said was that as a public servant I also had to act within a certain code of conduct and that it was not possible for me to lend my signature to a document containing a political attack couched in those terms.

Therefore, I continued, I had two suggestions to make. If they really wished to express their political sentiments they could do so in a separate appendix giving their views, so that the main body of the report, also containing our recommendations could be signed by all of us. There was an immediate expression of unhappiness at this compromise proposal. By now, I was getting fed up with all this. I therefore told Minister Indika Gunawardene, that I was going to seek an appointment with the President and explain to her why as a public servant, I was not prepared to sign a political document for any government or for anybody.

I also pointed out that a political attack on any other party would be counter productive and that we faced the danger that our considered recommendations would be submerged in sterile political controversy. This had an instant effect. Mr. Indika Gunewardena said, “You don’t have to go so far.” The others too ultimately agreed to the revised draft, and all of us were able to sign the final report of the committee.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.