Story-telling gone with the wind

As a child I always wanted to listen to a story. However, most of the elderly people I knew were not so good at telling stories. One day I found a tramp at the doorstep asking for a morsel of food. When my mother offered him something to eat, I asked him whether he could tell me a story. Then he settled down under a tree. Some of my friends, too, flocked around him. He looked at us lovingly and told the following story.

“A long time ago, I was spending my New Year holidays with my eldest daughter and her kids. While we were chatting at night a sudden storm started blowing and the kuppi lampuva (bottle lamp) was nowhere to be seen. We couldn’t see anything or anyone in the house. The kids started crying. As there was nothing else to do, I narrated a story. One day when I was living alone in my house, I heard a crash in the attic. Everybody was shocked. I told the kids that I would go in and investigate. To my horror I found a baby elephant in the attic. It was trying to read some of my old books kept there.”

“The storm was still raging and the kids were eager to know what happened to the elephant in the attic. We stayed huddled together for some time. After a while, the stormy weather subsided and the kids heaved a sigh of relief. “What happened to the little jumbo?” a kid asked. The little jumbo had disappeared when the bottle lamp was lit.”

This type of story-telling is better than reading a story in a book. You do not need to tell a complete story to children. Leave something to their imagination. This is definitely better than reading a story from a book. When you narrate a story there is always an immediate feedback. “Then what happened?” We forget the fact that we tell stories to our friends all the time. “You know, this guy is a strange fellow. He doesn’t talk to anyone but manages to live alone in his small house. However, he is always at the doorstep looking at the passers-by like a lord.”

Getting started is the first hurdle in story-telling. Sometimes shyness will hold you back or you might have the fear that you will not be able to finish the story. Therefore weave a story from your childhood experiences or something you have heard. Such stories have a magic because they will take you back to your childhood.

When once you are relaxed you can really let your imagination to make interesting episodes. Keeping the children’s attention is easy if your story is very imaginative. When you sense that children’s interest is flagging drop in a dramatic element: “Then we saw a huge foot print at the base of the cave. I thought it was the foot print of a giant coming out of the cave. Then do you know what happened?”

In order to tell a tale successfully you need audience participation. Sometimes you start the tale but someone else will move it forward. Still, you have to abide by some basic rules. Do not allow anyone to kill off the protagonist or the main character. If you find it difficult to finish off a tale, bring in the ‘act of God’ for which you do not have to offer any explanation.

At home or parties you can adopt the improvisation technique to tell the story. Everyone loves to listen to a well-crafted story that would mesmerize them. Always try to use the creative right side of your brain. The imagination of good story tellers is unlimited. If you feel that you are getting stuck in the middle of a story, simply look around and you will find something interesting. Then you can tell the story in a different way. If everything fails, tell that you will continue the story tomorrow.

Stories have more influence than any amount of preaching or lecturing. Aesop became famous because of his fables narrated lucidly. As a child I always carried a copy of Aesop’s Fables for constant reading. Stories work their magic on bored children. One day a child asked his grandfather to narrate a story about a tap. The grandfather knew that the child was testing him. He thought for a moment and said, “Have you ever heard the story of an old brass tap in an abandoned house? You know the brass tap was once a shiny little thing. The housewife always polished it, but the children always blackened it with dirt.”

“One day the old house had to be demolished. The brass tap ended up in a junkyard. However, a kid picked it up and polished it. His father fitted the shining brass tap in the bathroom. The kid who brought it home was thrilled.”

One day our English teacher brought some line drawings to the class and distributed them to the students. We were wondering what to do with the line drawings. “Children, now you have to make up a story to fit into the line drawing you have got.” Some children kept on staring at the line drawings while a few students kept on writing stories. It was a novel experience in story-telling. Those who wrote stories became good story tellers in later life.

Children are the most ephemeral of creatures who will be thrilled to hear a well-knit story. They may forget the news on television but will remember the stories they have heard. There were many folk tales about  Andare, the court jester and Mahadenamutta. Today there is hardly anyone to tell those stories to children because television and computers have robbed the children’s curiosity to listen to stories. On the other hand, even their parents and grandparents have become victims of modern way of living. The younger generation is more interested in looking at moving figures on the television screen than listening to stories.

In the so-called Digital Age it looks like adults have no time or inclination to tell stories and children have been weaned from the habit of listening to age-old tales.

Marigold Creation blossoms in Avissawella: A new sanctuary for learning, Art and community

Let’s understand what a masterpiece is and how it originated

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.