Digital Mobility Solutions Lanka appoints Priyanthini McNair to board

Digital Mobility Solutions Lanka PLC (DMSL), the company behind Sri Lanka’s homegrown digital platform PickMe, has appointed seasoned international banking professional Priyanthini McNair as an Independent Non-Executive Director, strengthening its board with deep expertise in corporate banking, finance, governance, risk and strategic growth.

McNair brings more than 25 years of international experience across the UK, Hong Kong, the MENAT region, India and Singapore and is the founder of APG Management Consulting.

More recently, she served as Global Co-Head of Corporate Coverage and Senior Managing Director at Emirates NBD Group, where she led international corporate banking, overseeing a multi-billion-dollar portfolio and global sector coverage across seven countries.

“We are pleased to welcome Priyanthini McNair to the board. Her extensive banking experience and international exposure bring valuable expertise as we enter our next phase of development,” said DMSL founder and CEO Jiffry Zulfer.

“As a publicly listed company, her background will be particularly relevant as we expand our existing product verticals and explore new adjacent opportunities to drive our growth.  As an Independent Non-Executive Director, her perspective will also contribute to strengthening our governance framework and building greater confidence among the investors and other stakeholders.”

Prior to Emirates NBD, McNair spent over two decades with HSBC in senior leadership roles. These included Regional Head of Coverage for Commercial Banking across MENAT, based in Dubai, UK Head of Leveraged Corporates in London and Global Head of Business Development and Chief of Staff for Large Corporates across the UK and Hong Kong.

Earlier in her career, she trained in audit and business assurance services at Ernst & Young and PricewaterhouseCoopers in Sri Lanka. Her experience spans corporate banking and finance, risk governance, capital allocation, ESG-aligned financing and strategic growth across multiple sectors and geographies.

McNair is a CFA Charterholder, a Chartered Accountant of CA Sri Lanka and an Associate of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants, UK. She is also an active coach and mentor.

Her appointment further strengthens PickMe’s board as the company continues to scale its technology platform and expand the digital services ecosystem.

She joins a board chaired by Ajit Gunewardene and comprising Zulfer, Ruchi Gunewardene, Mano Rajakariar, Tasnim Salie, Prof. Amal Kumarage, Travis Roche and Keith Modder.