High Commissioner Jha commends Indian CEO Forum’s contribution to strengthening ties with Sri Lanka

High Commissioner of India Santosh Jha, attended the Annual General Meeting of the Indian CEO Forum in Colombo on Friday.

The Indian CEO Forum (ICF) concluded its Annual General Meeting (AGM) on 22 May 2026, reaffirming its commitment to strengthening India–Sri Lanka economic & commercial relations, investment facilitation and corporate engagement.

The Indian CEO Forum comprises Indian companies operating in Sri Lanka, Indian heads of multinational corporations, and Sri Lankan companies led by Indian business leaders. Today, the Forum represents more than 70 member organisations that collectively contribute significantly to employment generation, management and technical expertise, skills development, foreign exchange earnings, and economic activity in Sri Lanka.

During Cyclone Ditwah, ICF member companies contributed more than $ 2 Million dollars to support and help the people of Sri Lanka and help the government to rebuild Sri Lanka.

On the occasion of the AGM, High Commissioner Jha commended the Indian CEO Forum for its consistent efforts in promoting economic cooperation, corporate engagement, and bilateral economic collaboration between the two countries.

In a fireside conversation with ICF President Kishore Reddy, High Commissioner Jha highlighted the strong and growing relationship between India and Sri Lanka, noting the importance of connectivity, whether it is digital, energy, maritime, or land connectivity. He also elaborated on the need for upgradation of India Sri Lanka FTA and the potential of such a renewed FTA to power the next wave of growth and investment in Sri Lanka. He detailed how Sri Lanka has a significant positive trade deficit with India on FTA enabled trade. He encouraged Indian companies to also have a ‘Neighborhood First’ Policy.

The event witnessed the participation of over 100 companies, leaders of Sri Lankan industry, senior Government officials and members of the diplomatic corps.