Nations Trust Bank reaffirms commitment to biodiversity by renewing partnership with WNPS

Nations Trust Bank recently renewed its longstanding partnership with the Wildlife and Nature Protection Society (WNPS), continuing support of the organisations monthly public lecture series. The renewal reaffirms the Bank’s deep commitment to environmental stewardship and biodiversity conservation.

As one of the key sustainability initiatives for the Bank, the partnership, supports a series of free educational lectures conducted by environmental experts. The sessions cover a variety of topics including biodiversity conservation, climate action, environmental research and sustainability. The lectures are open to nature enthusiasts and members of the public and Nations Trust Bank’s customers.

Commenting on the partnership renewal, Nations Trust Bank’s Chief Marketing Officer, Sanjaya Senarath said, “Environmental conservation is a shared responsibility that requires collective action and greater awareness. Through our continued partnership with WNPS, we are committed to supporting initiatives that educate and inspire individuals to make informed, environmentally responsible choices that contribute to the protection of our natural heritage for future generations.”

The upcoming monthly lecture, scheduled for 18 June at the Jasmine Hall, BMICH, will feature Dr. Prabath Jayasinghe, Principal Scientist at the National Aquatic Resources Research and Development Agency (NARA) and one of Sri Lanka’s foremost marine researchers.

He will present key finding from the historic 30-day voyage of the research vessel Dr. Fridtjof Nansen, is regarded as the most comprehensive scientific survey ever undertaken in Sri Lankan waters under the Nansen Programme. For the first time, audiences will gain a rare, first-hand account of this groundbreaking expedition and its discoveries across Sri Lanka’s Exclusive Economic Zone.

Tokyo Cement marks World Environment Day with 100,000 mangroves for a Greener Sri Lanka

Hatton National Bank and Nucleus Software celebrate five year partnership driving transaction banking transformation and excellence, powered by FinnAxia

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.