Baby Cheramy and Clogard among SL’s Favourite Product Brands in PepperCube T25

Hemas Consumer Brands’ two most trusted household names Baby Cheramy and Clogard have been recognised among Sri Lanka’s Favourite Product Brands in a survey conducted by PepperCube Consultants and published by LMD.

The results of the T25 favourite products/service brands are based on a monthly sample of 1,000 and reported cumulatively from 12,000 respondents at an all-island level over a 12-month period (May 2025 – April 2026).

The survey captures 12,000 consumer responses annually, based on unprompted nominations for favourite product and service brands, with the Top 25 brands in each category selected and listed alphabetically.

The inclusion of both Baby Cheramy and Clogard in the 2026 survey reflects their strong presence in Sri Lankan households and the deep trust they have earned through decades of consistently delivering products that meet the evolving needs of consumers.

Baby Cheramy’s recognition among Sri Lanka’s Favourite Product Brands reflects consumer preference for the brand among families. In addition, being listed in the LMD as the ‘Most Loved Brand’ along with being named the ‘Best of Best’ Brand reinforces Baby Cheramy’s position at the forefront of the baby care category.

Hemas Consumer Brands General Manager Marketing Tulsi Liyanage stated, “Being recognised as a Favourite Product Brand in the PepperCube T25 Survey is a special honour. Our brands have nurtured babies across many generations and we are deeply grateful for that emotional connection which drives us to continually innovate and deliver superior value through trusted, high-quality products that evolve alongside the changing needs of families.”

Similarly, Clogard’s recognition in the T25 PepperCube Survey reflects the confidence Sri Lankan households continue to place in the brand and its role in promoting a complete oral care routine that delivers better oral health to Sri Lankan families.

Furthermore, Clogard has been recognised among the ‘Most Loved Product Brands’ in 2026 by LMD. Combining nature-inspired ingredients with scientific innovation, Clogard has consistently evolved to provide effective oral care solutions tailored to local needs. To further strengthen this promise Clogard and FDI World Dental Federation are working together in Sri Lanka to improve overall oral health.

Hemas Consumer Brands General Manager Marketing Sachini Gamage Welungoda commented, “We are incredibly honoured to announce that Clogard has been recognised as a Favourite Product Brand in the T25 PepperCube Survey published by LMD, a recognition that reflects the immense trust and confidence Sri Lankan families have placed in us to protect their oral care routines every single day for over 30 years!”