David Pieris Group expands global footprint with investment in Dubai-based Navire Logistics

The David Pieris Group continues to strengthen its international presence with the acquisition of 50% ownership in Navire Logistics Services L.L.C, (www.navirelogistics.com) a reputed logistics company based in Dubai and Oman. This strategic move marks a significant milestone in the Group’s journey towards expanding its operations beyond Sri Lanka and positioning itself in the international markets.

In Sri Lanka, the Group’s logistics arm, D P Logistics (Private) Limited (DPL), has already established itself as a comprehensive logistics solutions provider — covering warehousing, transportation, freight forwarding, project logistics, inland distribution and custom house brokering.

DPL currently ranks among the top ten players in warehousing and 3PL operations and holds one of the largest container fleets amongst the logistics companies in the country. Despite operating in a highly fragmented freight forwarding market, DPL continues to capture a growing share, reinforcing its reputation as one of the very few local companies with expertise across all logistics disciplines.

David Pieris Group also acquired in 2022, Pulsar Shipping Agencies (Pvt.) Limited, the shipping arm of Expolanka Holdings PLC to expand its Logistics & Shipping Cluster into ship agency, husbandry services and marine logistics.

Leveraging this strong domestic foundation, DPL has now extended its capabilities to the international stage through its partnership with Navire Logistics Services L.L.C. The company’s expertise in custom house brokering, freight forwarding, cargo consolidation, warehousing, and transport solutions will be integrated into Navire Logistics’ operations, enhancing service quality and efficiency across the Middle East and South Asia.

The investment also extends to operations in Oman through a fully owned subsidiary, with further expansion plans already underway to establish operations in Saudi Arabia, Thailand, and India — strengthening the Group’s regional logistics network.

Jaffna Hindu College earns regional praise at AIA Healthiest Schools Competition

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.