Emerging threats and political blinkers

Underworld killings have resumed, after a brief lull, giving the lie to the NPP politicians’ claim that the recent arrests of some criminals, such as Kehelbaddara Padme, have dealt a paralysing blow to the underworld. Such arrests are no doubt essential and welcome, but voids they create in the underworld do not last long, for there are many dangerous criminals vying for supremacy.

Amidst media reports of a series of successful anti-drug raids in this country, disturbing news has emanated from India. The Indian Intelligence agencies are concerned that the Dawood Ibrahim syndicate (also known as D-syndicate), in a bid to expand its drug business through South India, is tapping into the LTTE’s network. IANS has reported that the powerful syndicate is in touch with the LTTE operatives and sympathisers, both in Sri Lanka and India, to help further the drug business.

For the LTTE, which was defeated by the Sri Lankan forces, this may serve as a perfect opportunity, the IANS report has said, noting that a probe by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) has suggested that the LTTE is attempting to make a comeback. Some of its operatives who managed to escape are trying to withdraw money from some foreign banks, according to the NIA, and the Indian intelligence agencies suspect that the funds are meant to revive the LTTE.

There is no need to panic, but a matter that is so serious as to have caused concern to the Indian intelligence agencies should not be taken lightly. One may recall that the Easter Sunday carnage (2019) could have been prevented if the UNP-led Yahapalana government, which was backed by the JVP to the hilt, had heeded repeated warnings of terrorist activities in the Eastern Province and, above all, the actionable intelligence about the impending terror strikes.

The D-syndicate’s efforts to forge links with the LTTE rump must not be taken in isolation; they must be viewed against the backdrop of attempts that have reportedly been made to revive the LTTE since 2009. On 02 September 2021, we pointed out in an editorial comment, that a probe into three Sri Lankan boats carrying drugs and arms, intercepted in Indian waters, had shed light on an attempt to revive the LTTE. The Indian media revealed that an NIA investigation into the seizure of a haul of heroin, five AK-47 assault rifles, 1,000 rounds of ammunition from a boat intercepted off the coast of Vizhinjam, Kerala, had fuelled speculation that an international drug trafficking and gun-running outfit was attempting to revive the LTTE. The probe teams believed that the five assault rifles seized from the boat were for the LTTE sleeper cells. The main suspect with LTTE links, Suresh Rajan, arrested in India, was found to have links to international drug smugglers. He was an associate of Makandure Madush, a notorious Sri Lankan drug dealer, who died allegedly in a shootout while being in police custody. The Tamil Nadu intelligence officers confirmed that Rajan and Madush had worked together.

The Sri Lankan law enforcement authorities, engaged in anti-narcotics operations, and the current government leaders must not lose sight of possible links between southern drug dealers and LTTE activists. It behoves them to shed their political blinkers and intensify their focus on areas other than Tangalle, the hometown of the Rajapaksa family. True, a main drug smuggling route runs via the southern seas, and that must be blocked, but due to the intensification of naval and police operations in the South, there is the possibility of drug dealers bringing in narcotics through other parts of the country.

It may be recalled that a few months after Prabhakaran’s death in 2009, the Indian media quoted some Indian experts as having said that there was ‘a tug-of-war in the drug world to grab Prabhakaran’s multi-million-dollar drug cartel’, and there was the possibility of terrorist groups such as the Lashkar-e-Taiba stepping in to fill the vacuum. Swaraj Puri, former Director General of India’s Narcotics Control Board said the LTTE’s drug smuggling activities had been stalled, after its military defeat in Sri Lanka, but other drug lords would vie for the market the LTTE had created. Is it that the situation the Indian experts warned of is playing out now?

The incumbent Sri Lankan government is struggling to neutralise the underworld, and therefore whether it will be able to face a formidable terrorist threat to national security is the question. Political stability and national security are prerequisites for economic recovery and investment promotion. The UNHRC has launched a campaign to press war charges against the Sri Lankan military; some foreign governments have imposed sanctions on several war-time military commanders who were instrumental in defeating the LTTE, and legal action has been instituted in this country against some former military commanders, based on claims made by ex-LTTE members. These hostile measures are believed to have taken their toll on the morale of the armed forces members, who may baulk at going all out to defeat terrorism in the event of the scourge manifesting itself again—absit omen!

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.