Uber Eats continues Sri Lankan expansion now in Nuwara Eliya

Uber Eats is now live in Nuwara Eliya, making it easier for locals and tourists to enjoy their favourite meals – from a hot plate of kottu on a chilly evening to a comforting rice and curry spread or crispy egg hoppers – delivered right to their doorstep.

Known for its cool climate, old-world charm, and rolling tea estates, Nuwara Eliya sees a surge of Sri Lankan and international visitors during the April holiday season. But as temperatures drop in the evenings, food options have traditionally been limited, with many outlets closing early.

With Uber Eats now available, consumers can discover and order from a growing range of local restaurants and neighbourhood favourites – without stepping out. The platform also extends access to meals into the late evening, making it easier to find food even after most outlets have closed. In Nuwara Eliya, specially designed temperature-controlled insulated bags will help ensure meals are delivered hot. Consumers can choose from a wide variety of cuisines including Sri Lankan, Indian, Chinese, Thai, and Arabic or order from global brands such as KFC, Pizza Hut, and Domino’s.

The launch supports the local community by enabling restaurants to reach more customers across the city, while creating flexible earning opportunities for delivery partners, especially during the busy holiday season.

Varun Wijewardane, Country Manager – Delivery, Uber Sri Lanka, said: “Nuwara Eliya is one of Sri Lanka’s most loved destinations, especially during the April season. With Uber Eats now live, we’re making it easier to enjoy great food more conveniently – from everyday favourites to late evening short eats while also supporting local restaurants and creating earning opportunities within the community. This comes on the back of an aggressive expansion of our services across Sri Lanka – providing our consumers with convenient access to local favourites and unlocking earning opportunities for more Sri Lankan communities.”

Entry in Nuwara Eliya builds on expansion from last year across 6 districts including Hikkaduwa, Ambalangoda, Chilaw, Wennappuwa, and Puttalam, Jaffna, Gampola, Matale, Matara, Weligama, Mirissa, and Anuradhapura – further strengthening Uber Eats’ position as the country’s go-to delivery platform.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.