Sri Lankan pride, global glory: Solar Booze sweeps service and performance excellence awards

Solar Booze Ltd has emerged as one of Sri Lanka’s most recognised renewable energy companies in 2025, celebrating two prestigious awards on both international and national platforms. At the FusionSolar 4th Global Installer Summit 2025, held in Dongguan, China, the company was honored with the Excellent Performance Award, while on home soil it received the Service Excellence Award for Customer-Centric Renewable Solutions at the Clean Energy Awards 2025.

Commenting on the achievement, Solar Booze Managing Director Nadika Herath said: “This achievement reflects the hard work of our dedicated team and the trust placed in us by our clients. It also reaffirms our vision of positioning Sri Lanka as a leader in renewable energy innovation.”

The success was not only about recognition but also about responsibility. As Solar Booze continues to grow, the company emphasised its role in inspiring both industry peers and local communities to adopt sustainable practices and accelerate the transition toward renewable energy solutions with the world’s number one products

Marketing and Sales Consultant Peshala Wijewardhana said: “These awards strengthen our commitment to shaping a cleaner and smarter energy future for Sri Lanka. We see this as a reaffirmation of our ongoing efforts. We are already committed to these initiatives, and this serves as confirmation from all these bodies regarding our efforts’

Looking ahead, Solar Booze is set to expand its partnerships and introduce more advanced, technology-driven energy solutions, reaffirming its pledge to create a brighter, greener and smarter future for Sri Lanka and beyond.

As the authorized distribution partner for Huawei FusionSolar Solutions and LONGi PV modules in Sri Lanka, Solar Booze continues to serve as a true “One Stop Shop” for comprehensive solar solutions. Guided by our vision to promote sustainable renewable energy generation, we are committed to leading the nation’s transition toward renewable energy and establishing ourselves as the most trusted brand for solar solutions in Sri Lanka.