CBK plays major role inducting Sirisena as common opposition candidate against MR

By this time MR was coming to the end of his second term. The thoughts of politicians turned to the forthcoming Presidential election particularly because the constitution stipulated only a two term tenure for a President. Also by this time the Rajapaksa family, which played only a minor role when MR first sought the Presidency, had grown to large proportions and were seen to be interfering in the daily management of the country’s affairs.

Gotabaya, who had played a crucial role in the war became the Secretary in charge of Urban Development. He performed magnificently turning Colombo and its suburbs into a much more habitable environment. Since there were a large number of demobbed soldiers he used their skills for urban development projects. Modeled on the facilities made available to war veterans in the US he built a defence headquarters, hospitals, Universities, hospices for the disabled and employed many soldiers in related businesses.

It was a splendid effort and he drew the admiration of the general public for his honesty and efficiency. But others unfortunately got involved in deal making. All in all MR began to lose his popularity due to the shenanigans of his relatives. There was growing dissent largely because Prime Minister Jayaratne was critically ill and MR did not appoint a successor. All these embers of discontent were fanned energetically by CBK who had returned after a long sojourn abroad.

MR had treated her brutally by removing her from a senior post in the SLFP, reducing her perks, and generally keeping her away from party activities. It was a bitter pill for her to swallow considering the fact that she had given the nomination to MR despite her friends predicting the fate that would eventually befall her. She then began a campaign to dislodge MR and as usual put her heart and soul into the effort. Her first step was to establish a rapport with Ranil because the UNP had the biggest number of opposition MPs.

She visited me in the Ministry once ostensibly to settle some Attanagalla electorate matter but in reality to discuss current politics. I respectfuly told her that I had no intention of supporting the UNP. Later Bhikkhu Ratana met me in the Parliament lounge and pleaded with me to join a coalition to stop MR on the tracks and prevent a Rajapaksa from entering the Presidential race. He too did not get any satisfaction from me.

While enjoying a chit chat in the Parliamentary lobby I was told that CBK and some senior UNPers were zeroing in on Maithripala Sirisena as the possible rebel chief against MR. Sirisena was a popular General Secretary of the party after being promoted by party seniors like DM Jayaratne to contest that post against CBK’s nominee SB Dissanayake. After the successful SB defected to the UNP, he was appointed Secretary of the party and CBK apologized publicly for overlooking him earlier.

With Prime Minister DM Jayaratne incapacitated Sirisena had an expectation that he would be appointed to succeed him. But MR did not respond. At the same time Karu Jayasuriya, who had played a heroic role as Speaker having bravely confronted the thuggish Pohottuwa elements who were hell bent on causing mayhem in Parliament, also came into contention since he was backed by Maduluwawe Sobitha Thero. Rev Sobhita had emerged as a kingmaker since he boldly confronted the Rajapaksas even going so far as to say that if no layman was willing to take on MR he would enter the fray. Sobhita and I were friends from my Vidyodaya days as a teacher.

Our last meeting was in Bath University in the UK when Mahinda Deegalla who was a teacher there invited me to be a participant in a seminar on modern Buddhism. Among the monks invited for this conference were Sobhita, Athureliye Ratana and a chief monk from Vavuniya. Scholars of modern Buddhism like Gananath Obeyesekere, HL Seneviratne, Ananda Wickremaratne, RALH Gunawardene, Premasiri, Heinz Bechert and Peter Ibbotson were also invited. We had a very interesting four days together and I was able to renew my links with Sobhita.

I took it upon myself to visit the dorm in which the monks were lodged to ensure that they were comfortable. We had meals together and I heard the gossip that they shared with each other. When some monks were embarrassed, Sobhita introduced me as a ‘safe person’ and the slander of their high priests continued amidst much laughter.

I learnt of the anti-Rajapaksa movement from Rev. Ratana who spoke to me in confidence in the lobby of Parliament. He wanted me as “an educated man” to join them in supporting a successor to MR. I declined his offer of changing sides because I had no personal grudge against MR as did the other conspirators. It was also clear at that time that there was no consensus on whom the challenger would be.

As the leader of the largest party in the opposition Ranil was keen to contest. It was at this juncture that CBK entered the scene and suggested Maithripala Sirisena as a possible common candidate. But others were skeptical because not many knew of him and Sirisena was not very much of a social person. He was known as a camp follower of the Bandaranaikes.

The opposition to MR became strong after he declared that he was seeking a third term as President. He also wanted to hold the election long before its due date. The possibility of a third term was precluded by a provision in our constitution. To circumvent that MR was contemplating introducing an amendment to the constitution to be passed with a two third majority in Parliament. This was a galling situation especially for the left which could not easily accept the Napoleonic ambitions of a President who was fast losing his popularity.

At meetings of the Central Committee of the SLFP this matter was taken up. But our feeble protests were overridden by the MR faction. The Communist Party led by DEW Gunasekera protested and threatened to vote against the amendment in Parliament. The LSSP and Vasudeva remained silent and when presented in Parliament the amendment was passed but in time proved it to be a pyrrhic victory. However we have to admit that our reluctant vote for this aberration is an unforgivable black mark in our Parliamentary record.

At this stage there occurred an event which changed the destiny of the country. When CBK first sounded out Maitripala Sirisena he was reluctant to take on MR and his clique. Though unhappy he did not have a major issue with MR. His “bete noir” was Basil. As he said later he was afraid that if he lost to MR he would be six feet under when considering the treatment meted out to Sarath Fonseka after the last presidential election. On the other hand Duminda Dissanayake from Anuradhapura who was close to Sirisena had boldly come out against MR and was assisting CBK in her political chess game.

But unexpectedly fate played a hand. Maitri’s son had gone on a holiday to Passikudah and had been embroiled in an altercation with the son of a DIG. The Police had thrown the book at the young man and Maitri had to rush to Passikudah to save his son. Maitri was treated badly by the local police and the media followed up with a coverage that painted his son as the offender. He believed that Basil Rajapaksa was behind this episode and particularly that the media assault was directed by him. At this stage he contacted me and asked me to intercede with Derana TV network to give a fair coverage of this misadventure and not pillory his son. This unexpected event resulted in his pledge to CBK that he would go forward as the anti-Rajapaksa candidate.

But other problems still remained. The Tamil parties said that they did not know enough about Maitri to wholeheartedly endorse him. Ranil did not know him well either and raised a query as to whether he could be trusted to follow their policies as President. At this stage CBK put her reputation on the line and declared that “If they trusted her they should trust Maitri on her guarantee”. It was a guarantee that she came to regret later. Anyway the opposition to MR had found a credible candidate with a strong local base in the North Central Province who could carry the fight to the incumbent who was too good a politician not to know that he was now in trouble.

I was at a Central Committee meeting of the SLFP with only a few days to go for the handing over of nominations. At that time news was swirling around of Maitri’s possible defection which was a prelude to the famous “hopper” incident which I will recount presently. Though Maitri’s face was flushed at the CC meeting it went on without incident with both parties steering clear of the topic of nominations.

However after this meeting Maitri was taken to a discussion with pro MR Buddhist monks parked elsewhere in the building. He was asked to swear with a relic casket on his head that he would not contest the coming presidential election. Being a good politician Maitri did so without batting an eyelid and after receiving the thanks of the departing monks was treated to a hopper dinner by MR.

After dinner, and many assurances later, he departed and on the following day announced his candidature at a press conference together with a handful of MP’s who crossed over along with him.

After that another meeting was held by MR of the party caucus where he explained that the rebels had been expelled. Looking round the hall he said sardonically that if there were others present who wanted to leave they should have the courtesy of first telling him about it. It was a sad day for him and he was full of suspicion. The following day we had another meeting of the Central Committee. He suggested the name of Pavithra Wanniarachchi to be the party Secretary succeeding Maitri. I countered with the name of Anura Yapa as he was a lawyer. MR replied that Pavithra was also a lawyer but he did not challenge my candidate and Anura became the new Secretary of the SLFP. It was clear that MR’s confidence had taken a beating and he was afraid of calling for a vote on that issue.

One of the factors which persuaded Maitri to enter the fray was a statistical study made by a young researcher named Malith Jayatilleke which concluded that MR could be beaten electorally. He had studied the voting patterns of electorates in depth and said that with a proper election campaign Maitri could emerge the winner. Jayatilleke came from a Communist family well known to DEW Gunasekera, the Communist leader. DEW presented Malith’s data to a group, which included me, at his office in the Senior Minister’s building.

He also made a presentation to MR and Basil and recommended that they should go the full term of the Presidency and not hold a premature election. But this was rejected and a witch hunt was launched against Jayatilleke. He was called a UNP plant even though DEW vouched for him. At that time Jayatilleke was employed as an administrative officer in Dullas Alahapperuma’s Ministry. Dullas was forced to dismiss him. This was another blunder since Jayatilleke joined Maitri’s campaign as a statistical advisor. He was nominated as a National list MP later by the newly elected President.

We were in Parliament when Maitri created a furore among Journalists in the lobby by speaking to them in riddles while leaving for a press conference where he declared his candidature. Several MPs including Rajitha Senaratne, Duminda Dissanayake, MK D S Gunawardane and Rajiva Wijesinha joined him at this meeting and pledged to support him in the forthcoming election. Then they all visited CBK at her residence and began to coordinate the efforts of the diverse groups that were now coming together to support their common candidate.

After protesting that he should be the common candidate Ranil bowed to internal and external pressures and withdrew his candidature in exchange for a promise that he would be made Prime Minister. There was no doubt that the UNP would be the main contributor to the Sirisena campaign. As the under dog he gathered UNP votes, as required by Malith’s statistical analysis, by flattering Ranil and threatening hell and brimstone for the Rajapaksas and their cohorts.

I got back to Kandy and found that MR’s cousin Udayanga Weeratunga had been put to oversee the campaign there. I had no difficulty working with him as I knew him well and also because he was a congenial person. Soon he must have reported that there was no mischief afoot in Kandy and he was transferred to some other district. It was a close race in Kandy but Sirisena swept the board. However we did well in Galagedera electorate which was won by MR.

Saman Kelegama analysed the unexpected results of the 2015 election in the following manner; “Although the margin of the incoming President Maithripala Sirisena’s victory was thin, he managed to make substantial inroads in the majority Sinhala Buddhist vote base [70 percent of the population] of Rajapaksa. This, capped by overwhelming support from the minority communities in Sri Lanka, enabled Sirisena to romp home.

“The Sirisena victory is due to a combination of factors; after nine years of Rajapaksas rule there was an anti-incumbency factor, portraying Rajapaksa as the war hero [winning the three decade long war in the North and East of Sri Lanka against the Tamil Tigers in 2009] had run out of steam [as this slogan was overplayed during the 2010 polls when Rajapaksa got reelected for the second time as executive President] nepotism and corruption had proliferated; there was a complete breakdown of rule of law and governance was at the lowest level; there was an increasing tendency towards authoritarianism; and the country was gradually moving towards a one party state.” [Institute of South Asian Studies-15 January 2015].

Back to education and its many challenges, Mrs. B tries to get me back as her Secretary

Ranjith Siyambalapitiya’s ‘My Wendala Orchard’ – a richly layered tribute to generations of cultivation

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.