Markss-George Steuart Health expand access to healthcare solutions across Sri Lanka

From left: George Steuart Health Finance Director Thulitha J., Markss CCO Damian Silva, Markss CEO Sajeevan W., PC Shanaka Wijesinghe PC of Markss, Markss Chairman Rajeev N., George Steuart Health Executive Director Sanjiva W., George Steuart Health Managing Director Erandajith R. and George Steuart Health Director Thushantha N.

Markss HLC, a Sri Lankan healthcare company celebrating its 20th anniversary this month and George Steuart Health (GS Health), the healthcare vertical of George Steuart & Company, yesterday announced a strategic partnership covering the marketing and distribution of selected products from Markss’ pharmaceutical portfolio.

Under the partnership, GS Health will leverage its established nationwide distribution network, experienced field force and long-standing relationships with pharmacies, hospitals and the medical community to expand the reach and availability of selected Markss pharmaceutical products across Sri Lanka.

The partnership enables Markss to further strengthen its focus on the critical care segment, where the company has established a strong presence, while continuing to invest in and accelerate the introduction of advanced healthcare solutions currently in its pipeline.

The collaboration also represents the beginning of a broader strategic relationship between the two companies, with both Markss and GS Health committed to exploring opportunities to further strengthen and expand the partnership in the future.

“As Markss celebrates 20 years of serving Sri Lanka’s healthcare community, this partnership with George Steuart Health marks an important step in our next chapter,” said Markss founder and Chairman Rajiv Nanayakkara.

“By working with GS Health to expand the reach of selected products from our pharmaceutical portfolio, we will be able to make these products more accessible to the healthcare professionals and patients across the country. At the same time, this partnership allows Markss to sharpen its focus on critical care and accelerate our plans to introduce advanced healthcare solutions already in our pipeline. We look forward to further strengthening this relationship with GS Health as we move forward.”

“GS Health is pleased to partner with Markss and support the wider reach of its selected pharmaceutical products through our established distribution capabilities,” said GS Health Managing Director Erandajith Ranasinghe.

“This collaboration is an opportunity for both organisations to build a strong and sustainable relationship, while contributing to greater access to quality healthcare solutions across Sri Lanka. We look forward to further developing the partnership in the years ahead.”

The agreement was formally signed last week by Sajeevan Wickramasingha, who assumes the role of Managing Director of Markss, effective October 01, 2026 and George Steuart Health Managing Director Erandajith Ranasinghe.