Ratmalana Airport: The Truth, The Whole Truth, And Nothing But The Truth

On 15 February 2026, the day of the India vs Pakistan T20 cricket match, 15 executive jets (or ‘bizjets’) landed at the Colombo-Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA), Katunayake.

Although Ratmalana is closer to the Premadasa Stadium, Khettarama, Colombo, no aircraft opted to operate to the Colombo International Airport Ratmalana (CIAR).

More than Rs 100 million was expended two years ago by the Airport and Aviation – Sri Lanka Limited (AASL) to upgrade the Ratmalana Airport Road and lighting. Yet the work remains incomplete, and the airport precinct is subject to flooding due to deliberate destruction of the perfectly good water drainage system that was in existence.

It is no wonder, then, that operators avoid coming to Ratmalana. This historic airport (RML/VCCC), the first in Ceylon, has a single, relatively short runway in the vicinity of which pilots must obey Visual Flight Rules (VFR). That is to ‘see and be seen’ in the absence of Instrument Landing aids. Have priorities been mixed up and money sent down the drain?

The air traffic control tower at RIA lacks 360-degree visibility. The view on the south side of the airport was initially blocked by a restroom, and later by unplanned, tall buildings including the Kotelawala Defence Academy (KDU) and Hospital. Adding insult to injury, the authorities have further shortened the available landing distance because the air traffic controllers cannot see landing aircraft at the touchdown point, when approaching from the Galle Road (southern) end.

Unfortunately, the reduced runway length is hardly enough for a bizjet to land on. Seen in the picture below are the regulation ‘piano keys’ on the runway surface. Those constitute the pilot’s ‘aiming point’, or the landing zone, whereby the aircraft is expected to touch down 1,000 to 1,500 feet inside and abeam the six rectangular markings. But as the piano keys are now painted on the displaced landing threshold itself (the previous piano key markings are faintly visible at the runway’s edge closest to the camera), this reduces the usable length of the runway to, metaphorically speaking, ‘the size of a ‘postage stamp’, thus compromising safety. Instead of this implementing this potentially dangerous measure, the visibility problem from the control tower could have been solved by the intelligent use of Closed-Circuit Television (CCTV) cameras.

In the bottom of the picture one can also see the solid concrete wall at the Galle Road end of the runway. This is another potential source of danger to aircraft that may (a) accidentally undershoot or overrun during an approach to land from the other (Attidiya) end, or (b) have to abort a takeoff in the same direction in case of a sudden emergency (loss of power, for example.) I suppose the authorities believe that even though it has been documented that there are on average six overruns worldwide every year such accidents will never happen at CIAR.

A reason given for the presence and viability of the notorious wall is that the advertisements on its Galle Road face generate revenue for the Sri Lanka Air Force (SLAF) Welfare Society. In fact, to celebrate the 75th anniversary of the SLAF, a bicycle race has been sponsored mainly by the same advertiser who pays millions to the SLAF for providing hoarding space on the wall. That, dear readers, is the ‘naked truth’ of this sad and potentially disastrous affair.

All that the aircraft owners and operators are asking for is replacement of the concrete wall with a less hazardous frangible (breaking on impact), transparent fence. With proper signage and warnings for road users, an observant motor vehicle driver could brake and stop in time to prevent collision with an uncontrolled, over-running aircraft that can be seen from a distance, thus providing adequate warning of imminent danger.

Interested parties have even convinced the Minister of Civil Aviation that the wall should remain.

Over the past 20 years, the civil aviation authorities have done nothing to mitigate threats and hazards at Ratmalana Airport. Expert advice has fallen on deaf ears. Instead, administrators have created more problems for themselves. They have even demolished a part of the iconic terminal building built in the 1950s, in the name of progress. That is another story!

RCyAF/SLAF, Air Ceylon, Air Lanka, Singapore Airlines & SriLankan Airlines.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.