Lighter moments in the University of Ceylon in the 1960s

In the 1950’s and early 60’s the only sure path for students to pursue a professional career was through the University of Ceylon. The most difficult University to get into was one’s own. Why? Because everyone wanted to get in, so the competition was tough. Allowing for the differences in schooling opportunities and teaching standards across the country, and vagaries such as examination blues, keen competition ensured that only the creme-de-la-crème of the youth of our time entered the hallowed portals of the two campuses in Colombo and Peradeniya. It follows that the University, by many measures, was the “academic citadel” for the youth of our time.

The unique status of the University of Ceylon at the time was depicted by a ditty that likened it to the institution of marriage: The title tells it all in the midst of serious study, assignments/ course-works whilst burning mid-night oil.

At the time I entered the University, the Vice Chancellor of theUniversity of Ceylon was Sir Nicholas Attygalle, a powerful and charismatic personality, who was concurrently the Dean of the Faculty of Medicine. The Dean of the Faculty of Science was Professor B. L. T. de Silva, whose specialty was Botany. All university final exam results had to be approved by the University Senate. Heads of all Faculties, including the two senior professors mentioned above, were members of the Senate. The non-voting member was the University Registrar.

While Senate sessions to approve examination results were largely a formality, there were occasions when some discretion was required to resolve the cases of students with marginal performance at the finals. As a rule, Sir Nicholas took the stand that a medical doctor cannot be released into society unless the pass mark has been reached in ‘all’ subjects. He was against passing a medical student who was ‘a marginal case’. He was firm in his conviction.

The day came when the issue was whether to grant a pass to a veteran student taking Botany Honours. The student had failed in his two previous attempts at the final examinations. Finals were held only once a year. At his third ‘shy’ the student had passed in three subjects; in the fourth, his score was 37, three short of the pass mark of 40. The Senate had to agree to raise the score of 37 to 40 for this student to be awarded the degree. A key condition to do so was agreement by the subject matter Professor. As it was Botany, B.L.T. de Silva’s approval was mandatory.

B.L.T. de Silva assumed a stance similar to Nicholas Attygalle in refusing to grant a degree if a student had not achieved the pass mark in all four subjects. Nicholas found this exasperating, probably because he appreciated the enormity of a “veteran” student having to come back again to sit the examination in another year’s time if he were not granted his degree at these

Nicholas had the final say as the Chairman of the Senate and Vice Chancellor, and cajoled: ‘I say, BLT, push the bugger up, push the bugger up, please. Only a bloody plant will die!’ BLT acceded and there is a baby boomer botanist today who owes his career to Sir Nicholas Attygalle.

From the stately library building at the Peradeniya Campus, it is a short trek on the footbridge across the Mahaweli to Akbar- Nell Hall, the hall of residence located adjacent to the Faculty of Engineering (affectionately referred to as the EFac). The EFac itself had its lecture rooms and laboratories in hangar-like halls on either side of a wide and open corridor some 400 meters long. The layout presented an impressive open-air vastness particular to this Faculty. At one end of the corridor was the canteen and at the other the Akbar-Nell Hall, home to many EFac students. Of all the academic faculties in Peradeniya, the EFac probably had students from the widest socio-economic range of Sri Lankan society.

Among them, in our time, was a student from a wealthy family who had the only car among the Akbar-Nell residents. To his credit, he was a clean living and charitable soul. He lent his car to friends in a spirit of camaraderie, with no questions asked about the purpose for which it was to be used.

‘Machang! I need to take Beatrice out tonight for a film,’ was enough for him to lend the car. On another day it was another friend taking Latha out. No questions about what might happen in the back seat with Latha. He also obliged friends who were taking out Kamala, Lolita, Nirmalee or Pathma (all fictional names randomly picked and any resemblance to anybody living is completely unintentional).

But this student had one failure (a couple, in fact): he failed to get through his exams in the first attempt. The Dean of the Engineering Faculty was Professor E.O.E. Pereira, a mustachioed, pipe smoking, charismatic Burgher gentleman. His exterior was stern, but on the inside he was a kind and fatherly figure to the students.

The Annual Sessions of the Institution of Engineers was held in 1968 in Colombo. The guest speakers included Professor EOE (as he was affectionately called) and the General Manager of Railways (GMR). An interesting conversation took place on the podium.

‘Very well; and how is the railway network?’ ‘Progressing smoothly. But EOE, I have a problem.’ ‘What is it?’

I have a nephew studying under you. He is a bright chap, but he is failing his exams,’ was the GMR’s uneasy answer. ‘What is his name?’

The name was provided by GMR. EOE’s eyes lit up in understanding.

‘Has he got a car?’ ‘Yes, yes he has a car, you know him EOE?’ asked the GMR,

with excitement in his voice. ‘I know him well, I trust’, EOE said. ‘That is a relief. I hope you can help him, EOE?’ ‘I can, but he has to study harder.’ ‘How do you mean?’ was the troubled GMR’s query about his nephew. ‘I go to the Faculty Club every night for a drink and then drive up Hantane Hill to my residence at about ten o’clock in the night for dinner.’

If the GMR was wondering what EOE’s time of returning home at 10 in the night had to do with his nephew, he was about to learn its significance.

‘When I return home from the club, I see his car parked near the Hantane bypass, and he is with his girl-friend in the car,’ and EOE added, ‘You will have to ask him to pull up his pants and start studying seriously!’

It would have been fascinating to have been a fly on the wallduring the subsequent meeting between the uncle and the nephew: the nephew strongly denying any nightly escapades, and the uncle discounting any arguments on the basis of the unimpeachable witness’ account of the Dean of the Faculty of Engineering!

EOE in 1969 deservedly became the Vice Chancellor. The nephew of the GMR, I am glad to say, put his head down following EOE’s advice, and graduated. He retired as a very successful Hospital Engineer, and resident in a chic suburb not far from London.

The most popular restaurant among Peradeniya undergrads in 60’s was Lyons in Kandy. This was the place where the fare was easy on the pocket and the portions generous, an attractive combination to the campus fraternity with tight budgets. The up-market place was El Sombrero, a part of Queen’s Hotel. At Lyons, a mixed grill of steak, bacon, sausage and a “bulls-eye” was Rs 2.50 and a bottle of beer was Rs 3.00; at El Sombrero they were Rs 4.50 and Rs 4.00 respectively. Thus the latter location was reserved for a very special occasion. Being on about Rupees Ten (10) pocket money per week one had to choose the eating places wisely.

Then there was the East China Hotel opposite the lake. Here a plate of fried rice was served with a boiled egg. This was a clincher to cut down on costs, especially if there was a “biju- terian” (the Peradeniya vernacular for an egg eating-vegetarian!) in the group as the cost of ordering a special vegetable dish would also be averted.

However the pride of place for a meal went to the Peradeniya Rest House located much closer to the campus: it was set in a grove of trees opposite the entrance to the Botanical Gardens. The Rest House was run by the Kandy Municipality, which

adhered strictly to local government regulations. The rule that guests had to register in the guest book was not an issue, but an annoying quirk in the regulations – namely, that liquor could not be sold to those living within the Peradeniya local government area – was a hindrance, as this meant that students in the university campus would not be served liquor at the Rest House. So a strategy had to be hatched to beat the inequity of this rule.

An Engineering Faculty (EFac) undergrad and friends from Akbar Nell Hall signed in the Guest Book as ‘Bevis Perera (not his real name) and friends’ from Kollupitiya. The waiter winked knowingly. Several glasses of beer and an excellent meal were enjoyed and the bill was settled with the waiter the recipient of a decent tip and a participant in the ‘crime’. The culprits spread the message and there were many entries of ‘Bevis Perera and friends’ in the Guest Book during the ensuing months.

Bevis Perera was however a real person, a final year student at the EFac. He was a man with a missionary zeal to spread God’s message, and widely regarded as eccentric in his ways. Bevis also had a genuine difficulty: he invariably failed his examinations. He attributed these failures to divine interference in that the longer he spent at Peradeniya, the more he could spread the Lord’s word.

Perhaps his problem arose from the fact that his analytical judgments did not often align with the requirements of his course. For example, a dynamic vibration problem was given with the flywheel rotating at 1,800 revolutions per minute. The Professor had required the students to state assumptions in solving the vibrating frequencies of the flywheel. Bevis’s simple assumption was, ‘Let’s assume that the flywheel does not rotate and is stationary’. He reduced the problem in Dynamics to one of Statics. The examiner was not amused and gave him ‘zero’ for the assignment. This type of eccentricity marked his career and destined Bevis to a long innings at Peradeniya.

Bevis had never ever graced the Peradeniya Rest House and was oblivious to the chicanery committed in his name. The charade at the Rest House went on for about three months. Waiters with quivering palms were very happy to have Bevis arriving in many forms. This innocent deception would have continued if Bevis’s father, a top bureaucrat and head of a government corporation, had not visited the Rest House.

Near midnight on the fateful day, there was a commotion in the corridors of a Residential Hall and one could hear an elderly man’s shouting. The door to Bevis’s room was open and a man was seen severely chastising Bevis. The doors of the adjoining rooms on either side of the corridor opened and the male students in various stages of undress streamed towards Bevis’s room.

‘I know why you are failing exams,’ was the elderly man’s bellow, with finger pointing directly at Bevis. ‘You haunt the Rest House and that is why you fail!’ was the old man’s charge.

‘What are you saying, Dad?’ was Bevis’s mild reply in his state of confusion. ‘Don’t pretend, Bevis. When did you last go to the Rest House?’ shouted the dad. ‘I have never been to the Rest House,’ was the nonplussed Bevis’s reply.

What had happened was that Bevis’s father Wilfred Perera had come ‘on circuit’ visiting branch offices under him in Matale and Kandy. The tired man had checked into the Rest House at 11 p.m for a good night’s sleep and signed the Guest Book. Immediately his attention was attracted by the preceding entry, ‘Bevis Perera and friends’ from Kollupitiya. Going back on records confirmed that his son had been spending considerable money and time at the Rest House, evidently neglecting his studies.

Tired as he was, he immediately ordered his driver to take him to the Hall where Bevis was a residential student. This was a bad case of his father jumping to conclusions (leading to a thoppi and malle pol dialogue). But putting yourself in his shoes, can you blame Mr Perera? Bevis would have had a trying time to convince his father that all those entries in the Rest House register were pranks by friends who did not, in fact, wish him ill.

With friends like them, why would Bevis need enemies? In the event, after a long stay of seven years, Bevis finally scraped through the examinations to qualify as an engineer. He is now in the USA serving in a Christian Mission. Apparently, his father continued to disbelieve Bevis’s denials even after Bevis’ graduation.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.