Halal Council gets recognition from Sri Lanka Standard Institution for national quality

HAC Director/CEO Aakif Wahab (fifth from left) receives the Merit Award from Science and Technology Minister Prof. Chrishantha Abeysena and HAC Accountant M. Rushdi (fourth from right) accepts the certificate from SLSI Chairman Prof. Theekshana Suraweera. Others (from left): HAC Manager – Internal Compliance Ash Sheikh M. Abdullah, Head of Quality Assurance Nafas Nazeer, SLSI Deputy Director General S.U. Narangoda, Secretary to the Prime Minister G. Pradeep Saputhanthri, HAC Senior Executive M. Zakir, SLSI Director General Dr. Siddhika G. Senaratne, and Deputy Director General M.B.D. Neelakanth

The Halal Assessment Council (Guarantee) Ltd., (HAC) has been recognised with a Merit Award at the Sri Lanka National Quality Awards 2023 (SLNQA) — the country’s most prestigious recognition for organisational excellence, conducted by the Sri Lanka Standards Institution (SLSI).

The awards ceremony, held on 11 November 2025, was graced by Science and Technology Minister Prof. Chrishantha Abeysena. The event celebrated public- and private-sector organisations that demonstrate outstanding commitment to quality, innovation, and continuous improvement.

Receiving the award HAC Director and CEO Aakif Wahab said: “This recognition is a tribute to the dedication and professionalism of our entire team. It reaffirms HAC’s commitment to upholding internationally recognised certification standards. Through these efforts, Sri Lankan Halal-certified food and beverage manufacturers continue to uphold food-safety, be quality-driven, and remain ready to serve consumers locally and globally.”

HAC said it plays a pivotal role in certifying Halal-compliant Sri Lankan products for both domestic and international markets. Its robust assessment systems and adherence to ISO-based standards have helped Sri Lankan producers access new global markets and enhance consumer confidence in certified goods.

In 2024, Sri Lanka’s exports of Halal-certified products were estimated at $ 1.9 billion, accounting for 63% of all food and beverage exports and 16% of the nation’s total exports. This contribution underscores the growing importance of trusted certification in driving the country’s export economy.

The Sri Lanka National Quality Awards continue to serve as a platform for sharing best practices, fostering innovation, and motivating organisations to achieve excellence for national growth.