Jetwing Hotels partners TiECON 2026 Sri Lanka as Official Travel and Hospitality Partner

Jetwing Hotels is joining TiECON Colombo 2026 as the Official Travel and Hospitality Partner.

The event is powered by TiE Colombo, part of The Indus Entrepreneurs (TiE); a worldwide network with 60 chapters across 16 countries, bringing together a rich mix of entrepreneurs, intrapreneurs, policy makers and educators, visionaries and innovators, global leaders, private equity and venture capital leaders, and global brand builders. It will be held on 9 January 2026 in Colombo.

TiECON 2026 theme, “Go Global: Runway to the World”, marks a pivotal moment for Sri Lanka’s business landscape, a change from resilience to reinvention, and from local ambition to global aspiration. As the Official Travel and Hospitality Partner, Jetwing Hotels’ role underscores a shared commitment: ensuring that Sri Lanka’s emerging place on the global entrepreneurial map is matched with world-class hospitality and a warm, seamless experience for international delegates.

Jetwing Hotels Director – Marketing and Business Development Hashan Cooray and Jetwing Director Hashan Cooray said: “While welcoming international guests to experience the warmth and service excellence that Sri Lanka is famous for, we are equally proud to support TiE Colombo’s mission of building a platform that empowers Sri Lankan entrepreneurs and existing businesses to scale globally, driving the enhancement of Sri Lanka’s economy.”

As Sri Lanka positions itself as a hub for global entrepreneurship, Jetwing Hotels’s partnership ensures that visiting founders, venture capitalists, and thought leaders encounter a standard of hospitality that reflects the country’s readiness to welcome world-class business collaboration.

This collaboration seamlessly blends TiE’s global entrepreneurship ecosystem with Jetwing Hotels’s decades of hospitality leadership, creating an elevated environment for connection, conversation, and global opportunity.

As part of TiE Global, TiE Colombo connects Sri Lankan entrepreneurs to an international network of mentors, investors, and charter members who have built, scaled, and led global enterprises. With Jetwing Hotels supporting the hospitality experience for TiECON 2026, Sri Lanka strengthens its ability to host this global community with distinction.

TiE Colombo President Madu Ratnayake said: TiECON Colombo 2026 is where Sri Lankan ambition meets global opportunity. Partnering with Jetwing Hotels ensures we not only bring the world to Colombo, we welcome them with the best of Sri Lankan hospitality. Their support enhances the experience we want to create for every international participant stepping onto our runway to the world.”