British Sri Lankan Muslim Organisations donate  £ 25,000 to rebuilding and disaster recovery efforts

British Sri Lankan Muslim organisations came together to express their solidarity and commitment to help their motherland and handed over a collective donation of £25,000 (Rs 10.5 Million)  towards Sri Lankan Government’s  National Rebuilding and Disaster Recovery Initiative, efforts following the severe impact of Cyclone DITWA, Flooding and Landslide. Confirmation letter for this amount was handed over to Sri Lankan High Commissioner Nimal Senadheera at a meeting held on 30 December 2025 at the High Commission (SLHC) premises in London.

The meeting was also attended by Deputy High Commissioner Manorie Mallikaratchy and Brigadier Dilantha Fernando. A large number of heads and representatives of Sri Lankan Muslim organisations from across the United Kingdom as well as Council of Sri Lankan Muslims Organisations (Cosmos UK) President Shakeer Nawas and its ExCo members were also present. The representatives of organisations also shared details of their respective fundraising initiatives for various projects in Sri Lanka and indicated over  £250,000 was raised by British Sri Lankan Muslim organisations in UK to support victims in Sri Lanka.

Shakeer Nawas expressed his sincere appreciation to the High Commissioner. Senior High Commission officials and highlighted the collective initiative taken by both COSMOS-affiliated and non-affiliated   Muslim organisations based in the UK to raise funds to support emergency relief, rehabilitation, and recovery initiatives across Sri Lanka at a time of national calamity.  This laudable initiative signified the Islamic values of charity and generosity for those in need. He admired how the Muslim community in Sri Lanka also rose above racial or religious lines to join hands with other communities to offer emergency aid and actively volunteered and participated in large numbers in clean-up and recovery efforts.

COSMOS UK also reaffirmed its active support for the Sri Lanka High Commission’s “Your Tenner, Their Tomorrow” initiative and confirmed that the campaign would be promoted across community networks, encouraging wider public participation in Sri Lanka’s rebuilding efforts.

The High Commissioner while welcoming the continued engagement of the Sri Lankan diaspora in the United Kingdom with the High Commission,  also thanked COSMOS UK efforts in facilitating this project and thanked all Sri Lankan Muslim organisations for their collective generous donation towards Rebuilding Sri Lanka. His Excellency also assured that the meeting notes would be shared with the Foreign Ministry and the Government of Sri Lanka. The Deputy High Commissioner also addressed the audience highliting the united efforts of British Muslim Organisations engagement and support with this mission. The meeting concluded with a shared commitment to continue constructive engagement and cooperation with all stakeholders, in support of Sri Lanka’s ongoing humanitarian, recovery, and development needs.

22. SL Muslim Domicile BMG in association with Eden Foundation

24. Sri Lankan Muslim Community Foundation of Milton Keynes (Fishermead Mosque)