Youth can lead agriculture transformation with right investment: Prime Minister

Addresses ‘National Youth Agripreneur Showcase’ organised by SAPP, IFAD and Govt.

Agriculture, Livestock, Land and Irrigation Minister K. D. Lalkantha says investing in young agripreneurs is critical to boost country’s agriculture sector

IFAD Country Director Sherina Tabassum highlights commitment to placing youth at centre of rural transformation

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya underscored the pivotal role of rural youth in driving Sri Lanka’s agricultural transformation, addressing the ‘National Youth Agripreneur Showcase’ and Business-to-Business Connect event in Colombo.

The initiative, organised by the Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships Program (SAPP) with support from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Government of Sri Lanka, highlighted how targeted support can enable young entrepreneurs to build a more productive, resilient and market-driven agriculture sector while strengthening food security.

“Youth are central to transforming our agriculture sector into one that is more productive, resilient and market-driven and ensure food security,” she said. “The success of SAPP demonstrates that with the right support, young people can lead this transformation.”

The forum brought together 400 young agripreneurs, Government leaders and development partners to a flagship event highlighting the growing role of youth in driving innovation, productivity and resilience in Sri Lanka’s agriculture sector. It also provided a platform to connect rural youth with markets, financial institutions and private sector partners.

Agriculture, Livestock, Land and Irrigation Minister K. D. Lalkantha, who was also present at the forum, said: “Investing in young agripreneurs is critical to boost country’s agriculture sector. Through programs like SAPP, we are creating opportunities for youth to engage in modern, market-oriented agriculture while strengthening rural livelihoods.”

Since its launch in 2017, SAPP has supported nearly 5,000 young agripreneurs through a structured model combining skills development, access to finance and market linkages. The programme has shown how targeted investments in youth-led agribusiness can improve productivity, unlock new markets, generate sustainable incomes and contribute to rural transformation.

IFAD Country Director for Sri Lanka and Maldives Sherina Tabassum, highlighted IFAD’s commitment to placing youth at the centre of rural transformation.

“Investing in youth agripreneurs is not simply a development priority, it is one of the most powerful investments we can make in building sustainable, inclusive and resilient food systems,” she said.

The event featured presentations from young entrepreneurs, policy discussions on climate-resilient agriculture, digital innovation and financial inclusion, and a business-to-business platform to strengthen market linkages and partnerships.

It also highlighted the importance of South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC), with participation from Rural Enterprise Acceleration Project (REAP), an IFAD co-financed project in India. The exchange enabled cross-country learning on youth entrepreneurship models and scalable approaches to agribusiness development.

“It has been inspiring to see how young agripreneurs in Sri Lanka are building successful businesses. Exchanges like this allow us to learn from each other and adapt solutions that work across our countries,” said REAP project participant Arjun Mehra.

Bhagya Liyanaarachchi, a young agripreneur from Ruwanwella and founder of Saubhagya Agro, said: “With the support of SAPP, I was able to turn my passion for agriculture into a growing business and reach international markets. Today, I am proud to create opportunities for women in my community while promoting Sri Lankan products globally.”

By strengthening partnerships between government, the private sector and rural communities, IFAD continues to support pathways for young people to engage in agriculture as a viable and profitable livelihood.