Mother’s memories rescued from rusting in peace

The offer was too good to pass up. A brand-new Anton steel cupboard for just under 700 rupees, payable in 24 monthly instalments of 30 rupees. For my mother, Latha Jayasinghe, a teacher at Ananda College, it was a steal. She signed up for two.

Fifty-one years later, one of those now-rusty cupboards became a kind of time machine for me, her youngest son. My brother Lakal and I had long put off the task of sorting through her books — an emotionally charged duty we had avoided since her passing five years ago.

This November 15 will mark five years since she died peacefully in her sleep at home.

Inside the cupboard was the archive of a life: “new mathematics” syllabuses, question papers, cookery books, yellowing newspaper clippings, and dressmaking blocks.

There were also airmail letters from California, written during a brief period when my father, Lenin Jayasinghe, became a “geographical bachelor” as she stayed longer with her late brother, Jayantha, and his family.

At a time when office furniture was not meant for homes, my mother saw only practicality –one cupboard for spices and condiments, the other for her youngest son, to keep his clothes and clutter neatly locked away.

During the lengthy clearing, the school curriculum and other teaching materials from the cupboard were packed into eight plastic sacks for recycling. The cookery books and her own recipes, written in her handwriting, were preserved, as they remained useful half a century later.

One of her books is dated 1964–1965, with colour photos culled from foreign magazines to make the hand-written recipes more appetising.

Her opening entry is on making clarified ghee, an essential ingredient in “Muslim cookery”. “Imported ghee is generally refined, but not so the raw ghee available in the local market,” she wrote. “Such local ghee shouldn’t be used unless it has been refined.” She set out her method for doing that.

Apart from teaching, her first passion, she was widely acknowledged by friends and family as an excellent cook.

Her culinary skills became, somewhat, an annoyance for us in later life. When she was hosted to a restaurant meal — in true Sri Lankan mother fashion — she would dismiss a gourmet meal as being too expensive, something she could turn out better at home for next to nothing.

Her resolve was often as strong as the steel cupboard, which faithfully guarded her life’s work as a trusted safe. Since I left home over four decades ago, her books and precious papers found shelter in the Anton cupboard.

Getting it restored was no easy task. First, it was too heavy to move. No automotive painter would undertake the challenge of restoring a 1975 steel cupboard with “hammered” finish doors, that rough, textured look you sometimes see on old iron safes.

Fortunately, the same painter who restored my father’s 1953 Velocette Mac 350 motorcycle, I Samson, would step up to the task.

The steel box, six feet six inches tall, three feet wide, and 19 inches deep, needs four people to carry it because St. Anthony’s Industries, at the time, used thick-gauge metal to turn out a piece of office furniture that outlasted its owner.

The cost of restoration was far more than the price of a similar-capacity steel cupboard brand-new, but you can’t put a price on cherished memories. Hence, the project — a restoration I am sure my mother would not have approved of because of the cost.

She would have wanted it to rust in peace without wasting cash on a doubtful resurrection.

But then again, she may have pushed her first love — Lenin, the handyman (who predeceased her in January 2018) — to do it all by himself to save money.

I have also learnt from her that it is best to present her with a fait accompli. And this time, too, I am sure she will not disapprove.

The anatomy of the bond scam and the Ranil – Sirisena fallout

­A Lifetime of Academic Excellence: An Appreciation of Professor Subramaniam Sotheeswaran

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.