AIA Insurance pays tribute to Sarath Wikramanayake as he retires from Board

AIA Insurance Lanka Limited extends its heartfelt appreciation to Independent Non-Executive Director Sarath Wikramanayake, who retired from the Board of Directors on 31 July 2025, after the completion of years of distinguished service to the Company. During his tenure Mr. Wikramanayake has been an integral part of the Company, contributing significantly to its strategic growth and direction.

Mr. Wikramanayake has been associated with AIA Insurance since 2003 and was reappointed as an Independent Non-Executive Director in August 2016. He has served in the Company’s many Board Committees including the Chairmanship of the Company’s Board Audit Committee. His legacy at AIA Insurance has been marked by strategic insight, financial acumen, and his deep commitment to corporate governance.

A Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka since 1979, Mr. Wikramanayake brought a wealth of experience to AIA, having held senior leadership and Board positions both locally and internationally. His distinguished career includes 19 years at the Bank of Butterfield in Bermuda, where he rose to the position of Executive Vice-President. Upon returning to Sri Lanka, he served as Chief Executive Officer of Union Assurance Limited and was elected President of the Insurance Association of Sri Lanka in 2002.

AIA Insurance Lanka Chairman Biswa Misra, Director/Chief Executive Officer, Ms. Chathuri Munaweera, the Board, and the team at AIA Insurance Lanka thank Mr. Wikramanayake immensely for his exceptional service and his lasting impact to the Company and the broader financial services industry in Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka gears up to host 9th International Boat Show & Conference

Lively share trading led by Hemas Holdings helps revive CSE; turnover crosses Rs 8 billion

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.