Hayleys Aventura introduces Sri Lanka’s first automated rotary parking system

As Sri Lanka’s cities continue to grow, the demand for parking within increasingly limited spaces has become a pressing urban challenge. Addressing this need, Hayleys Aventura (Pvt) Ltd., a subsidiary of Hayleys PLC and one of Sri Lanka’s leading industrial solutions providers, has commissioned the country’s first outdoor automated rotary parking system, introducing a new generation of smart parking technology to the local market.

The latest installation builds on Hayleys Aventura’s growing expertise in advanced parking technologies, following the successful implementation of a 40-car automated pit-puzzle parking system in Bandarawela, 45 two-post stack parking units in Colombo 03 and several other successful installations. Together, these projects demonstrate the company’s capability to deliver practical, space-efficient parking solutions for modern urban developments.

Dr. Wasaba Jayasekera, Managing Director of Hayleys Aventura (Pvt) Ltd. and Group Management Committee Member of Hayleys PLC, said, “The commissioning of Sri Lanka’s first outdoor automated rotary parking system represents an important step forward in the country’s urban infrastructure journey. As our cities continue to grow and available land becomes increasingly limited, innovative engineering solutions such as automated rotary parking systems will become essential in helping developers and businesses maximise space while improving convenience, safety and sustainability. At Hayleys Aventura, we remain committed to introducing world-class technologies through trusted global partnerships and local engineering expertise to help shape smarter, more resilient cities for the future.”

The Council for Business with Britain appoints Ameena Ziauddin president at 26th Annual General Meeting

Vietjet’s July Double Day Sale offers Sri Lankan travellers USD90 flights to Vietnam

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.