Teachers wave cane at govt.

Trade unions representing school teachers and principals have resolved to launch a countrywide strike on 12 December. They accuse the NPP government of continuing to ignore their problems and trying to railroad them into accepting its educational reforms, which they have rejected as ill-conceived. The school system is already grappling with various delays, and a strike by teachers and principals will make an already bad situation far worse. But the government does not seem to care. It bellows rhetoric, casts aspersions on all who express dissent, and bulldozes its way through, apparently in the belief that its mandate has come not from the people but from another dimension. We have seen such juggernauts careen downhill, spiral out of control, crash and shatter into pieces.

State workers, especially teachers and principals, played a very active role in bringing the NPP to power, last year, as evident from the massive swing in the postal votes for it. The government has kicked away the ladder and antagonised many trade unions. Kalutara District United Teachers’ Union Secretary, Tharindu Dilshan, has said teachers now regret ever having campaigned and voted for the NPP! General Secretary of the Ceylon Teachers’ Union Joseph Stalin has claimed that even the JVP’s Ceylon Teachers Service Union, once led by Deputy Minister Mahinda Jayasinghe, has closed ranks with the protesting trade unions. The governments of self-proclaimed leftists are no different from the capitalist regimes in their handling of labour disputes; they, too, ride roughshod over trade unions after winning elections with the help of workers. One may recall how the United Front government, comprising leftists, especially the LSSP, broke a bank employees’ strike in the early 1970s.

Curiously, the NPP government remains intransigent and waves the big stick, as it were, in dealing with teachers, while asking them to spare the cane and be lenient and empathetic towards students. Why the government has not consulted teachers and principals on the controversial educational reforms defies comprehension, for their cooperation is a prerequisite for implementing the proposed changes to school education.

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, who is also the Minister of Education, was in the vanguard of a university teachers’ protest campaign to pressure the Rajapaksa government to allocate funds amounting to 6% of GDP for education, in 2012, when she was in the groves of Academe. PM Amarasuriya, her Cabinet colleagues and President Anura Kumara Dissanayake brag that the state coffers are overflowing. Most of all, the President has decided to procure as many as 1,750 brand new double-cab pickup trucks for the MPs and state officials. The government has decided to absorb 50% of the cost of estate workers’ wage hikes, without passing it on to big plantation companies. So, the question is why the NPP government cannot allocate more funds for education and resolve the issues that have driven teachers and principals to protest.

Not that teachers and principals are without blame for the sorry state of affairs in the education sector. The thriving field of shadow education is an indictment of the school system. The Education Ministry has had to impose an attendance rule to make students in the GCE A/L classes attend school. However, the professional rights of teachers and principals must be respected and their grievances redressed while they are made to dedicate themselves to improving school education. The proposed educational reforms—or what is being released of it in dribs and drabs, to be exact—the government’ intransigence, bordering on hubris, and its hostile actions against teachers and their trade unions will make that goal all but unattainable.

The least the government can do to prevent the impending strike in the education sector and keep the state-run schools free from disruptions is to swallow its pride and talk to the warring teachers and principals and negotiate a solution. It will be counterproductive for the NPP regime to continue flexing its political muscles in an attempt to force the protesting trade unions into submission.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.