TikTok expands AI literacy efforts to help people better understand AI-generated content

TikTok announced a new set of initiatives to help people better identify and understand AI-generated content on the platform to ensure that they have a safe digital experience. As generative AI continues to transform how content is created and shared, the company is expanding its efforts to promote transparency through new educational resources, enhanced spam detection, and deeper collaboration with industry partners.

As AI unlocks new opportunities for creativity and self-expression, TikTok continues to invest in the tools, partnerships, and safeguards that help people confidently navigate AI-powered experiences while supporting authentic content and creator trust.

Helping people make informed decisions starts with education. To strengthen AI literacy, TikTok has partnered with the News & Media Literacy Alliance (NAMLE) and renowned deepfake researcher Henry Ajder to develop a practical guide that helps people better understand AI technologies, recognize AI-generated content, and use AI tools responsibly. In the coming weeks, TikTok will be launching an in-app AI literacy hub in Sri Lanka, providing educational resources whenever users search for AI-related topics. The hub will offer practical guidance on identifying AI-generated content and navigating AI-powered experiences with greater confidence.

“We believe people should have context, confidence and control over their experiences with AI on TikTok. We continue to invest in technologies, partnerships and educational resources that help people spot AI-generated content, understand how it’s created, and use these tools creatively and responsibly,” said Tom Varghese, AI Lead for TikTok’s Global Public Policy team.

TikTok is also continuing to invest in trusted organizations that promote AI literacy. Since launching the initiative in November 2025, partners including No Filtr and Raspberry Pi have produced educational content that has collectively generated more than 200 million views. TikTok has committed over US$4 million to the program to date and will continue expanding its investment to reach more communities worldwide.

Sri Lankan exporters face new EU sustainability rules as compliance deadlines loom

Sri Lankan gemological scientist innovates ‘one of world’s most powerful’ gem analysis microscopes

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.