Ambassador Prof. Pivithuru Janak Kumarasinghe presents credentials to Emperor of Japan

Newly appointed Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Japan Prof. Pivithuru Janak Kumarasinghe presented the Letters of Credence to His Majesty Naruhito at the Imperial Palace in Tokyo on 31 October 2025. The Credentials Presentation Ceremony is one of the most solemn and formal ceremonies held by His Majesty the Emperor of Japan.

Escorted by the Master of Ceremonies of the Imperial Household Agency, Ambassador Prof. Kumarasinghe was horse-drawn carriage courtesy of His Majesty from the historic Tokyo Station to the Imperial Palace.

At the outset of the formal occasion, His Majesty the Emperor conveyed warm greetings and best wishes to the President Anura Kumara Disanayaka and the Sri Lankan people which was warmly acknowledged by Ambassador Prof. Kumarasinghe. After the formal presentation of his credentials in the presence Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology Minister, Matsumoto Yohei, representing the Prime Minister and the Government of Japan, Ambassador Prof. Kumarasinghe was afforded the opportunity to engage in an informal conversation with His Majesty Naruhito.

Ambassador Prof. Kumarasinghe becomes the 19th Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Japan. A distinguished academic, economist, and public policy advisor, he brings over 25 years of experience in teaching, research, and national capacity-building.

Ambassador Prof. Kumarasinghe holds a Ph.D. in Development Economics from Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University (Japan), a Master’s Degree in Public Policy from the National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies (GRIPS), Japan, and a First-Class Honours Degree in Public Administration from the University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Sri Lanka.

Prior to this appointment, Ambassador Prof. Kumarasinghe served as a senior academic at the University of Sri Jayewardenepura, where played a pivotal role in academic reform, research development, and public policy formulation. His research portfolio spans diverse topics including economic development, savings behaviour, the role of SMEs, foreign remittances, and macroeconomic policy.

Ambassador Prof. Kumarasinghe has also served as a resource person to national ministries and institutions, including the Ministries of Education, Finance, and Defense, and held key administrative roles in the university sector, including Deputy Proctor, Director of Career Guidance, and Member of the University Governing Council.