EDEX Mid-Year Expo 2026 returns this month

The EDEX Mid-Year Expo 2026, Sri Lanka’s premier education and career fair, will return to BMICH, Colombo, on September 5 and 6, bringing together education providers, employers and international exhibitors to help students, job seekers and professionals make informed decisions about their next step.

The expo, which is open to the public from 9.30 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. on both days, will give visitors access to around 45 educational institutions, ten corporates, and direct overseas exhibitors from Finland and Japan.

The expo will serve as a one-stop destination for anyone seeking to broaden their education, skills, and career prospects by allowing visitors to explore higher education and employment opportunities in Sri Lanka and overseas.

Badli Hisham Adam, High Commissioner of Malaysia to Sri Lanka and the Maldives, will ceremonially declare the event open as Chief Guest.

EDEX offers students who completed or are preparing for their O/Ls and A/Ls the chance to compare education pathways, research institutions, and learn about options outside of school. It gives parents and guardians a way to better understand the choices offered to their children. Professionals and job seekers can also use the expo to connect with employers and identify career development opportunities.

A key component of the EDEX Mid-Year Expo 2026 will be its Job Fair, which will bring together companies representing multiple industry sectors, offering job seekers and young professionals an opportunity to explore employment options and engage directly with potential employers. Participating companies represent industries including healthcare, consumer goods, agriculture, aviation, cargo and freight, telecommunications, automotive, transportation, software, banking and finance. The Job Fair is designed to connect individuals seeking employment and career progression with organizations looking for talent across a diverse range of industries.

Mahinda Galagedara, Chairman of EDEX said, “EDEX’s mission has always been to assist young Sri Lankans in thinking about their future goals and looking beyond the next examination. We have developed a platform that connects education, skills, and employment over the course of two decades. By providing young people and their families with options that can impact their next phase and, eventually, their future, the Mid-Year Expo continues this purpose.”

For the first time in its history, EDEX has digitalised its Psychometric Test as part of its career guidance service, making the process more accessible and convenient for young people. Before visiting the Expo, participants can complete the Career Key online at their convenience using a mobile phone.

The Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Education, Higher Education & Vocational Education, Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, Ministry of Labor, and Ministry of Environment have all endorsed the event, demonstrating the broader significance of education, skills development, and employment opportunities for the country’s youth.

The Employers’ Federation of Ceylon, the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, and the Ceylon Career Guidance Association are the expo’s strategic partners. Wijeya Newspapers Ltd is the Print Media Partner, SLT-Mobitel is the Official Communication Partner, Sense is the Digital Media Partner, and PR Wire is the PR Partner.