Navy seizes 839 kg haul of drugs drifting in southern seas

Five arrested for smuggling cocaine, crystal methamphetamine (ice), and hashish

Deputy Defence Minister seeks more public support to eradicate drug menace

The Special Task Force (STF) has arrested five suspects over the seizure of over 830 kg of narcotics including cocaine, crystal methamphetamine (ice), and hashish, which were drifting in southern seas, on 14 October.

The Sri Lanka Navy, following a credible tip off, had conducted a special naval operation in the southern seas on 14 October and recovered 51 large bags containing the haul of drugs, which were abandoned at sea.

According to Police sources, the boat used for smuggling had also been taken into custody by the STF.

The SLN had brought the seized consignment to the Tangalle Fisheries Harbour and the Police Narcotics Bureau had confirmed that the haul of drugs contains 670 kg and 676 g of crystal methamphetamine (Ice), 156 kg and 542 g of heroin and 12 kg and 36 g of hashish.

The SLN said that the operation was carried out as part of the Navy’s intensified surveillance and intelligence-based efforts to prevent the influx of illegal drugs into Sri Lanka with the assistance of intelligence services.

Deputy Defence Minister Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Aruna Jayasekara (Retd.) and SLN Commander Vice Admiral Kanchana Banagoda, inspected the seized narcotics kept for identification at the Tangalle Fisheries Harbour.

Reiterating the Government’s commitment to safeguarding future generations from the drug menace, which is a grave threat to public safety and national security, Maj. Gen. Jayasekara explained the efforts taken under the Government’s initiative ‘Ratama Ekata Jathika Meheuma’, which is the national operation designed to eradicate drug menace from the country.

“Under this Government we have empowered all intelligence and law enforcement agencies, including the State Intelligence Service, the Tri-Forces, Sri Lanka Police, Police Narcotic Bureau, STF and the Coast Guard, to conduct their operations independently with coordination of those agencies. This has intensified operations and also achieved significant success,” he told the media.

The Deputy Defence Minister commended the efforts of the SLN, which engaged in guarding the sea routes that are used to smuggle narcotics and illegal substances into the country.

“The navy is taking all efforts in coordination with all other stakeholders committed to safeguarding national security. The Government is fully committed to make Sri Lanka a drug free country,” he said, highlighting the importance of public support to make such operations successful.