Cops as cat’s paw

The police are always in the news for the wrong reasons. There seems to be no end to their shameful display of subservience to politicians in power. They have published a statement made by former Minister Wimal Weerawansa to the Tangalle police last week regarding his much-publicised claim that a drug smuggler, recently arrested in the South, is a member of the JVP. The JVP-led NPP government saw red and unleashed the khaki brigade on Weerawansa. Having questioned him, the police issued a media statement, giving the impression to the public that he had walked back his claim, and the drug dealer had no links to the government. Weerawansa has flayed the police, claiming that they have committed a serious transgression. Addressing the media, on Saturday, he said the police had never been so politicised, and they had become a mere appendage of the ruling JVP.

The police have sought to please the government politicians who find themselves in an embarrassing situation due to the aforesaid drug dealer’s alleged links to their party. However, their subservience is not of recent origin. The police have never been independent of politicians in power. One may recall that the police allowed club-wielding UPFA goons to operate alongside them to crush Opposition protests during the Mahinda Rajapaksa government in which Weerawansa was a powerful Cabinet minister. When a journalist asked, at a press conference, why those violent elements had been allowed to operate in public carrying clubs in full view of the riot police, the then Police Spokesman had the chutzpah to claim that they were not goons and they may have carried ‘sticks’ to ward off stray dogs!

During the J. R. Jayewardene government, high-ranking police officers would salute Gonawala Sunil, a criminal working for that regime. In 1992, a group of journalists, mercilessly attacked by UNP goons, while covering a DUNF leaflet distribution campaign against the Premadasa government, in Colombo, could not lodge a complaint as the then Fort OIC stood blocking the main entrance to his khaki fortress, claiming that the place was closed!

In December 2016, during the Yahapalana government, the then IGP Pujith Jayasundera was caught on camera, answering a telephone call, at a public rally in Ratnapura, and telling someone reverentially that he had instructed the CID not to arrest a Nilame (or lay custodian of a shrine). In 2011, former SSP Nihal Karunaratne was sentenced to two years RI, suspended for 10 years, for having obstructed and threatened a group of police officers during a raid at the residence of a notorious criminal, named Beddegana Sanjeewa, in 2000, when he was the Head of President Chandrika Kumaratunga’s Security Division. Sanjeewa served under Karunaratne as a reserve Sub Inspector before being shot dead.

The SLPP-UNP government under President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s watch appointed Deshabandu Tennakoon IGP in violation of the Constitutional Council (CC) process. His nomination to the top post was endorsed by only four CC members, with two members opposing it and two others abstaining. The then Speaker Mahinda Yapa Abeywardene audaciously claimed that there was a tie and cast his vote for Tennakoon. Beholden to that failed regime, IGP Tennakoon went out of his way to please his political masters and lost his job.

The establishment of the National Police Commission (NPC) has not helped make the police independent of politicians in power. Worse, the Opposition says incumbent IGP Priyantha Weerasooriya has arrogated to himself some of the vital powers of the NPC and transferred dozens of OICs for political reasons. It has called for parliamentary inquiry, but in vain. This allegation must be probed.

The blame for politicising the police should be apportioned to successive governments. It is unbecoming of the NPP, which came to power, promising a new political culture and a ‘system change’, to have the police and other vital state institutions on a string, and make them do political work for it. The incumbent administration has taken the politicisation of the police to an entirely new level. It has brought back a retired police officer who actively took part in its election campaigns and made him the Director of the CID. Shani Abeysekera is his name.

It takes two to tango, as they say. The police are to be blamed for this sorry state of affairs just as much as the politicians. The police top brass would do well to learn from the predicament of their predecessors who pulled political chestnuts out of the fire for governments.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.