Softlogic GLOMARK marks International Children’s Day with beach outing for Ratmalana Deaf & Blind School children

Softlogic GLOMARK, a leading supermarket chain in Sri Lanka, conducted a heartfelt celebration of International Children’s Day by hosting a special day of education, fun and laughter for 82 students and 12 teachers from The Ceylon School for the Deaf & Blind in Ratmalana at the Dehiwela beach. This special event fulfilled a long-standing wish of the students to enjoy a day of fun at the beach.

The full day event was filled with joy and excitement, offering the children a chance to enjoy games, entertainment, gifts, and a delicious lunch, all in the spirit of togetherness and care. Making the celebration even more meaningful, around 25 of GLOMARK’s valued partners came forward to lend their support with generous contributions – both financial and in-kind. Hemas Manufacturing stepped forward as the Main Sponsor for the event.

The celebrations began with a warm welcome, as the children were greeted with flowers and chocolates upon arrival and offered a refreshing welcome drink. The opening ceremony featured the traditional lighting of the oil lamp, followed by a cake-cutting ceremony and a welcome speech, marking the official commencement of the event in a spirit of unity and festivity. A delicious lunch was then shared among the students, teachers, and organizers, creating an atmosphere of camaraderie and togetherness. The day’s activities continued with a special dubbing session conducted by Anuradha Sigera, which provided the children with an engaging and educational introduction to the art of voice acting.

Raynor Silva purchases 5 percent Seylan Bank shares from Dhammika Perera, further diversifying his presence in financial sector

Sri Lanka aims for global wellness industry crown with ‘no-barriers’ approach

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.