Irregularities in tender process for purchasing body cameras for police

Colombo, Sep. 28 (Daily Mirror) - There are suspicions of serious irregularities in the tender process for purchasing body cameras for police officers, Member of the People's Struggle Wasantha Mudalige said.

"A procurement process has been initiated to purchase 500 body cameras for the police. That is a necessary step. However, to ensure public safety, equipping only police officers engaged in duties outside police stations with cameras is not sufficient; security cameras are also needed inside police stations. Incidents of torture and beatings leading to death inside police stations continue to be reported. Nevertheless, despite taking a good decision regarding these body cameras, the government is executing this good work in a bad way" he told a media briefing.

This tender document has not been prepared properly. There are issues with several of its technical specifications. Anyone reading this TOR (Terms of Reference) document can clearly see that it was prepared using Artificial Intelligence. Even the lines generated when using ChatGPT have been left as they are without being removed. Instead of carefully drafting procurement documents considering the technical requirements suitable for Sri Lanka Police and the technical standards used in other countries, this is the kind of farce that happens when you hastily throw things into ChatGPT. Did they not at least re-read, inspect, and correct the shortcomings of a document generated by AI? If they had done so, why didn't they even think to erase those lines? he questioned.

There is another fact that proves the correctness of the criticisms raised by technical experts regarding the informal technical specifications of this tender. The prices submitted by the bidding companies range vastly from 50 million to 360 million rupees. There can be small price differences among companies, but how can there be a seven-fold gap? Isn't it because the required technical features and their standards were not properly specified? While the state-owned Telecom company submitted a bid of 170 million rupees, Mobitel, a company belonging to the very same entity, submitted a bid of around 60 million rupees. This alone proves it.

The next question is that 500 cameras are not sufficient for this project. Is this being launched as a pilot project, to be tested first and implemented later? Or is this a test to see if they can ask a favored company to submit lower prices, purchase a small number of cameras initially, and later award a larger order for more cameras to the same company at higher prices? It is reasonable for us to harbor this suspicion. On numerous previous occasions as well, they asked for permission just to put the camel's head inside the tent, and later take over the entire tent.

The way internet facilities are to be provided for these cameras is also questionable.