El Nino: Health Sector bracing for weather related diseases

Colombo, Aug. 26 (Daily Mirror) - With the El Niño weather phenomena set to trigger rainfall higher than normal, to be followed by a dry spell, the Health Ministry is gearing up to deal with a possible rise in climate-related diseases, an official said yesterday.

The Environment and Occupational Health Unit of the Health Ministry is working in this regard at the moment.

According to Consultant Community Physician of the division, Dr. Inoka Suraweera, the health authorities are liaising with the Meteorology Department and the Disaster Management Centre on the developments. She said regular public awareness regarding heat-related diseases was being carried out in engagement with the media as an initial step.

“On top of that, we are carrying out capacity-building programmes for health workers, particularly clinicians at the divisional level, regarding heat-related diseases. Actually, we are on board,” she told the Daily Mirror.

Referring to the expected high rainfall next, she said that the health authorities were bracing for possible weather events such as floods that could lead to diseases.

Besides, she said that the health authorities were in discussions with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) to implement a National Heat Health Action Plan through grant assistance.

“We began this discussion even before the El Niño warning,” she said.

She admitted that attention was being paid in this regard with the rise in temperature as a result of global warming.

In addition, she said there was another programme called ‘Heat and Workers’ Health’ to be implemented with the assistance of the International Labour Organization (ILO).

The programme is for the health benefits of people such as agricultural and construction workers who are exposed to excessive heat.

Sri Lanka is among a few South Asian countries identified with a temperature level that is considered too hot for people to be able to work safely outdoors for an average of six hours a day, according to a report compiled by the World Bank recently. India, Pakistan and Bangladesh are the other three countries in this category.

The World Bank, in its report titled From Risk to Resilience: Helping People and Firms Adapt in South Asia, says this is expected to rise to eight to nine hours a day by 2050.

South Asia is facing a sharp rise in extreme weather, with nearly 90 percent of the population expected to be exposed to intense heat and more than one in five people at risk of severe flooding by 2030. With public budgets under pressure, much of the adaptation effort will need to come from the private sector.

A new World Bank report lays out policy reforms that would help households and firms to adapt to increasingly frequent and damaging weather events, according to the World Bank.