Sri Lanka’s underworld violence escalates

Colombo, July 27 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lanka has recorded 22 shooting incidents so far this year, leaving 15 people dead and 12 others injured. Nearly half of these incidents, 10 in total, were reported within the two-week period between July 11 and July 25.

The 10 shootings during this period claimed three lives and left five people injured. The incidents have ranged from targeted killings and attacks linked to organized criminal groups. Several other incidents resulted in property damage or targeted individuals without causing casualties. Police have made a number of arrests in connection with the shootings, while investigations into the remaining cases are continuing.

Meanwhile, Sri Lanka Police have attributed the recent spate of shootings across the country to rival drug trafficking networks, saying the attacks are primarily driven by organized criminal disputes, contract killings, and attempts to intimidate rival groups.

Responding to questions about the ten shootings reported over the past two weeks, including the latest incident on Saturday, Police Spokesman Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) F.U. Wootler said every incident investigated so far has shown links to organized crime and the illegal drug trade.

According to the Police Spokesman, the shootings are largely the result of rival criminal groups attempting to eliminate competitors, settle financial disputes, and prevent opposing gangs from expanding their influence.

He said that many of the individuals believed to be orchestrating the attacks are currently operating from overseas, while the intended victims are often relatives or associates of rival gang members. Such attacks, he said, are carried out to intimidate opponents and send a message to competing criminal networks.

ASP Wootler said the Sri Lanka Police, under the direct guidance of the Inspector General of Police, have intensified intelligence operations, including telephone and communications analysis, to identify those responsible for planning and carrying out the attacks.

Referring to the fatal shooting in Bellanwila on July 25, he said that police arrested two suspects within an hour of the incident. According to investigators, one of those arrested is believed to be the gunman while the other allegedly rode the motorcycle used in the attack. Police also found evidence indicating that both suspects were heavily addicted to narcotics.

The Police Spokesman further revealed that investigators are increasingly finding that drugs, rather than cash, are being used as payment for contract killings. He said some suspects are allegedly willing to carry out murders in exchange for small quantities of narcotics.

Explaining why shootings appear to occur in clusters after relatively quiet periods, ASP Wootler said criminal groups wait until they have located their intended targets and identified opportunities when police presence is limited before carrying out attacks.

He acknowledged that it is impossible to deploy police officers at every location but said law enforcement agencies continue to rely on intelligence-led operations to prevent violent crime. He said that police will continue to take strict action against organized criminal groups and those involved in drug-related violence.

Shootings reported across the country between July 11 - July 25

Gunmen riding a motorcycle opened fire at a house in the Neboda, Matugama on July 11, although no injuries were reported.

A suspected drug trafficker snatched a traffic police officer's service firearm and shot at him during a narcotics raid in Katunayake on July 15. The officer was injured.

A 26-year-old man from Kaduwela was shot and killed by unidentified gunmen on July 16 in Wandurabumulla, Navagamuwa.

A 56-year-old security guard was shot and injured on July 19 inside the "Nisala Sewana" Dehiwala–Mount Lavinia public cemetery.

A 24-year-old suspect was shot and injured by police in Bokundara, Piliyandala on July 19 when he attempted to assault the officers with a sword.

Unidentified gunmen travelling in a car opened several rounds of fire on a fisherman's home in Devinuwara on July 21. No injuries were reported.

The house of a police sergeant came under gunfire in the Walawala area of Beliatta on the night of Wednesday, July 22. The officer and family members escaped without injury.

A 39-year-old man was shot dead during a child's birthday party at a function hall in the Palliyawatta area of Wattala on the night of Thursday, on July 23

A shooting incident near the Kuppiyawatta cemetery in Dematagoda left one man seriously injured on July 23.

A 55-year-old restaurant owner was fatally shot near the entrance to the Bellanwila walking track along the Dehiwala–Boralesgamuwa Road on July 25.

Two Sri Lankans suspected in Wattala shooting detained in India