Hayleys surpasses half-trillion revenue milestone in FY 2025/26

The Hayleys group recorded the highest revenue in its history during the financial year ended March 31, 2026, with a 19 percent year-on-year increase to Rs.585.02 billion.

The consolidated profit before tax rose by 4 percent to Rs.38.04 billion. The performance gathered momentum in the fourth quarter, with revenue increasing by 29 percent to Rs.164.62 billion and profit before tax improving by 6 percent to Rs.13.87 billion.

Every sector contributed positively to the operating earnings, driven by the domestic businesses benefiting from the favourable market dynamics and export-oriented sectors demonstrating resilience.

The operating environment remained supportive, reflecting the macroeconomic stability, accommodative monetary conditions and private sector credit growth.

While the latter part of 2025 was impacted by Cyclone Ditwah, economic activity recovered during the fourth quarter, supported by the reconstruction efforts and resilient domestic demand. Globally, the geopolitical tensions caused uncertainty, supply chain disruptions and volatility in the energy markets. Contd. on

The revenue growth was driven primarily by the consumer and retail sector, which recorded a 44 percent increase to Rs.156.74 billion. The group’s export-oriented sectors collectively recorded a revenue growth of 14 percent.

The consolidated earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation increased by 8 percent to Rs.64.82 billion, while the earnings before interest and tax rose by 2 percent to Rs.49.37 billion. Consequently, profit after tax amounted to Rs.22.22 billion for the year.

Following the completion of a Rs.9 billion rights issue, the group strengthened its capital base to pursue investments and facilitate the partial settlement of debt. Fitch Ratings reaffirmed the group’s National Long-Term Rating at ‘AAA (lka)’, with a Stable Outlook.

Chairman and Chief Executive Mohan Pandithage stated, “The year’s performance reflects the successful execution of the group’s strategic priorities, the capabilities of our people and our ability to remain focused and agile amid a constantly evolving operating environment. As we look ahead, our focus remains on building a more diversified portfolio through strategic expansion into new segments, markets and customer propositions.

Supported by a strengthened capital base and a disciplined growth agenda, we are well-positioned to capitalise on the emerging opportunities. The progress achieved in recent years provides a strong foundation for the future and we are excited about the opportunities that lie ahead as we continue to shape the next phase of the group’s growth journey.”

The group limited the increase in Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions to one percent and surpassed a workforce of 38,700 employees. The year also marked investments in the mobility and supermarket sectors, which are expected to contribute to future growth as they mature.

The board of directors of Hayleys consists of Chairman and Chief Executive Mohan Pandithage, Co-Chairman Dhammika Perera, Sarath Ganegoda, Rajitha Kariyawasan, Dr. Harsha Cabral PC, Ruwan Waidyaratne, Jayanthi Dharmasena, Rohan Karr, Gamini Gunaratne, Timothy Speldewinde, Yohan Perera, Jonathan Alles and Rumal Fernando.