WCIC sharpens focus on scaling women-owned businesses

The Women’s Chamber of Industry and Commerce (WCIC) is sharpening its focus on helping women entrepreneurs move beyond business creation towards sustainable growth, as it expands its membership, partnerships and advocacy footprint.

WCIC Chairperson Gayani de Alwis, concluding her second tenure, highlighted the Chamber’s efforts had increasingly centred on creating pathways for women to translate entrepreneurial ambition into viable enterprises and, importantly, build those businesses for the longer term.

“Ultimately, our impact is not measured by the number of programs we conducted, but by the women whose businesses grew, whose voices became stronger, whose horizons expanded and whose contribution to the economy became greater,” she said addressing the WCIC 41st Annual General Meeting (AGM) held on 22 September for which the Chief Guest was Canadian High Commissioner to Sri Lanka and the Maldives Isabelle Martin.

The focus has included a special initiative for female university students with an entrepreneurial mindset, regional chapter initiatives in the Northern Province, capacity-building programs and the inaugural ‘Beyond Ramp Up’ workshop.

The Chairperson said these initiatives were designed to move women “from aspiration to enterprise, and from enterprise to sustainable growth”, signaling a broader focus on strengthening the progression of women entrepreneurs beyond the initial stages of business formation.

WCIC recorded a 20% increase in membership during the period with membership crossing 460 and expanded its ecosystem through a series of strategic partnerships.

The Chamber entered partnerships through Memoranda of Understanding with organisations including the National Innovation Agency, DevPro, Information System Audit and Control Association Sri Lanka Chapter, National Chamber of Commerce Sri Lanka and Lanka Angel Network. WCIC said the partnerships were aimed at expanding members’ access to knowledge, technology, markets, networks and business opportunities.

Alongside its entrepreneurship agenda, WCIC also strengthened its policy advocacy, including support for the ratification of ILO Convention 190 (C190), awareness programs and the development and presentation of a C190 policy action paper to key stakeholders.

The Chamber said these efforts were intended to advance a more inclusive and respectful world of work, reflecting a move to translate advocacy into policy engagement and action.

Internally, WCIC also moved to strengthen its governance framework, revising its Articles of Association to ensure regulatory compliance and introducing a Code of Conduct and Board self-assessment. Clearer organisational roles, job descriptions and performance targets were also introduced as part of efforts to strengthen accountability and professionalise its operations.

The Chamber has meanwhile sought to strengthen the visibility and leadership of women in business through its flagship platforms, including the WCIC Prathibhabhisheka Women Entrepreneur Awards, Ramp Up Fashion Show and Women Leadership Forum.

Chairperson de Alwis said these have evolved beyond standalone events into platforms for recognition, visibility, capability building and leadership development.

WCIC also expanded its knowledge-sharing initiatives through a thought-leadership article series focused on women, business and the economy, while its monthly newsletter, WCIC Edit, was used to connect members with knowledge, opportunities and achievements.

Reflecting on her tenure, the Chairperson said the period had been about building a stronger, more connected and professionally governed organisation, while converting its wider ambitions into tangible opportunities for women in business.

“This period has been about turning ambition into action, advocacy into impact, and connection into opportunity,” she said.

For the 2026/2027 period the office bearers are: Chairperson Gayani de Alwis, 1st Vice Chairperson Ramani Ponnambalam, 2nd Vice Chairperson Nilani Seneviratne, Joint Secretary Tehani Mathew, Joint Secretary Sonali De Silva, Treasurer Zahra Cader, Assistant Treasurer Renuka Senanayake, while office board members appointed are Oshadhi Somasinghe, Krishnajina Rajapathirane, Zahara Ansary, Wathsala Wickramanayake, Eranthi Premaratne, Shabiya Ali Ahlam, Malarvili Anton, and Yolanthika Ellepola.