Africa’s coup contagion:Lessons for others

Madagascar has swapped ginger for chillies, as a popular Sri Lankan saying goes. It suffered under an unpopular government that came to power with the help of the military, and last Friday the army seized power by manipulating a Gen Z protest to bring down the unpopular regime it backed. Those who took to the streets to engineer a regime change now have a military junta to contend with!

Some political analysts have argued that Madagascar has become a victim of what they describe as ‘a coup contagion’, in the African Continent, and some more African nations are likely to be under military regimes sooner or later. One can only hope that their prognosis will not come true.

Going by the manner in which the military manipulated mass protests in Madagascar to advance its own agenda, one wonders whether the Gen Z activists, or the digital natives, became a cat’s paw; the youth led mass protests and toppled an unpopular government only to have the military grabbing power.

In Sri Lanka, too, the youth led the 2022 Aragalaya from the front, claiming that theirs was an apolitical protest movement, but it was hijacked by some radical political groups. Thankfully, the military did not seek to capitalise on the crisis, but radical forces led by the JVP made a determined bid to capture Parliament, albeit in vain. The beleaguered regime managed to retain its hold on power by electing Ranil Wickremesinghe as the President, but the political fallout from Aragalaya and the country’s worst ever economic crisis enabled the JVP to achieve its goal of capturing power.

Sri Lanka was lucky that although a democratically elected President was ousted through extra-parliamentary means, violent mobs failed to march on Parliament, and the people got an opportunity to vote an unpopular government out of power. The Constitution prevailed. But Sri Lanka’s democracy is not yet out of danger. Some sinister forces that strove to use the 2022 political upheavals to install a puppet regime in violation of the Constitution have got off scot-free.

In March 2024, the then Speaker Mahinda Yapa Abeywardana revealed in Parliament that at the height of Aragalaya, following the resignation of Gotabaya Rajapaksa as President, he had been asked by some foreign powers to take over the executive presidency in violation of the Constitution. “The goal of those who made that request was to create another Libya or Afghanistan here. They did not want to resolve the crisis or restore law and order to protect this country,” the Speaker said, adding that they had even threatened him when refused to do their bidding. “Among those who exerted pressure on me to take over as the President were some leading Bhikkhus and leaders of other religions. I knew that if I accepted that position without powers vested in me by the Constitution to do so, this country would end up in anarchy,” Abeywardena said.

There is no guarantee that the forces that tried to coerce Speaker Abeywardana into taking over the presidency will not try to appoint someone of their choice, military or civilian, as the Head of State, in case of another regime-shattering mass uprising—absit omen.

Strangely, Speaker Abeywardana’s revelation went uninvestigated, and even the self-proclaimed patriots, including those in the SLPP, did not call for a probe. In fact, the SLPP, which claims to be a party of patriots, should have ordered a high-level probe into Abeywardana’s claim. At least a Parliamentary Select Committee should have been appointed to investigate the alleged attempt to destroy Sri Lanka’s democracy. Better late than never. Will those who are wrapping themselves in the flag and claiming to be ready to lay down their lives for the country care to pressure the NPP government to conduct an investigation into Abeywardana’s claim that there was a sinister attempt to plunge this country into anarchy. The NPP should get to the bottom of it, for the possibility of another mass uprising cannot be ruled out. Anything is possible in politics.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.