Norway supports flood-affected communities in Sri Lanka

Norway is providing more than USD 2.4 million to assist those affected by severe flooding in Sri Lanka.

“Norway is contributing emergency assistance to people who have lost both their homes and livelihoods in Sri Lanka. A rapid response is crucial to ensure that those affected have shelter, food, healthcare and support to rebuild their communities,” said Norway’s Minister of International Development, Åsmund Aukrust.

The United Nations estimates that nearly 11 million people have been impacted by catastrophic floods and landslides across large parts of South and Southeast Asia. Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Thailand, Vietnam and Malaysia have experienced record rainfall since 17 November. In total, approximately 1,600 people have lost their lives, and 1.2 million have been forced to leave their homes. Critical infrastructure such as houses and roads has been destroyed, and health risks are increasing due to waterborne diseases and poor sanitation.

“Norway is now contributing NOK 20 million (approx. USD 2 million) to the Red Cross Movement and the UN system in Sri Lanka. These organisations have presence in the country and the capacity to respond quickly based on local needs,” Aukrust said.

Sri Lanka is among the hardest-hit countries. On 28 November, Cyclone Ditwah struck the country, bringing heavy rain and strong winds. The cyclone triggered landslides and caused the most severe floodsing in recent history. The Sri Lankan authorities have led the search and rescue operations and allocated significant resources for immediate relief. “When disasters of this magnitude occur, it is vital that the international community and countries like Norway step up and support local actors in managing the crisis,” Aukrust said.

In addition, the UN Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) has allocated USD 4.5 million for flood response in Sri Lanka. Around one in ten dollars in the fund comes from Norway.

Norway is also assisting flood-affected communities in Sri Lanka through an immediate response mechanism in the World Food Programme (WFP). The International Labour Organization (ILO) has re-allocated around USD 100,000 in a Norway-funded job generation project, to assist flood-affected participants. Furthermore, Norway has funded a UN expert to help coordinate ongoing relief efforts in the affected areas.

Code of Ethics for capital market influencers in the pipeline

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.