Experience as an Advisor to the Government on Productivity Promotion

LESSONS FROM MY CAREER: SYNTHESISING MANAGEMENT THEORY WITH PRACTICE – PART 26

Several events and activities converged, prompting the Ministry of Industrial Development to launch a productivity promotion drive named the National Productivity Year. One was the visit of a team from the Asian Productivity Organisation (APO), who were concerned that productivity promotion was not being actively pursued. They were unhappy that the National Institute of Business Management (NIBM), which was created to qualify for Sri Lanka’s membership in the Asian Productivity Organisation (APO), was no longer productivity-focused. The APO is an inter-governmental body established to reduce the productivity gap between Western countries and the Asia Pacific region countries, led by Japan.

The other event was a pronouncement by the industry/banking veteran, Mr Maxi Prelis, who highlighted that Sri Lanka’s productivity was very low compared with developed and middle-income countries. This was extensively reported in the media.

The NIBM, which was initially known as the Management Development and Productivity Centre (MDPC), was expected to promote productivity nationwide. Very soon, after it changed its name to the National Institute of Management (NIM), it shifted its focus to computer and marketing education, and productivity was largely forgotten. It still remained as the representative of the APO and handled the nominations for APO training programmes. Later, the institution became known as the National Institute of Business Management (NIBM) after an amendment to its Act.

This name change prompted some hilarious comments. One said that as NIM, they hardly had work and were called “Nikang Inna Minissu” (idle people). After the name change to NIBM, they could no longer be idle and were now called “Nikang Inna Beri Minissu. NIBM could not be blamed for focusing on computer and marketing courses, which were the needs of the time and money spinners. They found that this is the best way to meet the new rule of the Finance Ministry, which requires them to earn their own upkeep.

It was natural for them to forget productivity promotion, which was not a money spinner though essential for the country. This is a good example of a penny-wise pound-foolish decision by the government. In many countries in Asia, their National Productivity Organisations (NPOs) are funded by the government and carried out useful work. In fact Singapore at that time claimed that a significant part of GDP growth came from productivity improvement.

I was continuing my productivity seminars and consultancy and was quite happy with the flexibility I had. Noting the contents of the programme enunciated by the Ministry, and realising that the Ministry was on the wrong track regarding the activities of the National Productivity Year 1996, I wrote an article tracing the history of the productivity movement in Sri Lanka, how it had derailed, and what needed to be done. It was critical of the programme that was formulated. This was published in the Ceylon Daily News.

Early that morning, the Secretary of the Ministry of Industrial Development called me. It was around 6:30 in the morning, after he had read my article. When he introduced himself, I was a little startled. I thought he was going to sue me for the contents of my article. It was far from that. He said, “Why don’t you join us and help us with the National Productivity Year programme without being on the side and criticising our efforts. I met him later in the day, and he offered me LKR 10,000/- a month for three half days a week. I knew this would ruin my own consultancy practice and reduce my earning capacity. Still, I agreed, as it was a national effort. Later on, it became almost a full-time assignment, although I was paid only for three half days.

Later, I was asked to have a chat with the Minister, Hon. C.V. Gooneratne, a very charming and genial personality. I had a long chat and showed him the details of seminars I was conducting under my company, Productivity Techniques (Pvt) Ltd. He showed great interest. My appointment had to be approved by the cabinet. Later, the Minister informed me that some cabinet ministers opposed my appointment because they held the view that I was a UNP man, simply because I had held the Chairmanship of the ETF Board during the UNP era. Apparently, the Minister had defended me, saying that he would take full responsibility. My appointment was approved. This marked the beginning of my journey in promoting productivity across the nation.

I was asked to report for work on a particular day, only to be told that they had yet to find a place for me in the office and find a table. I worked from home for a week or two using my personal resources. Later, I was given an office and a huge table shaped like a cashew nut. It was the table that Minister G. G. Ponnambalam used when he was the Minister.

I began to understand how government offices worked when I needed some sheets of paper to create drafts. I even signed the requisition form, but the papers were not forthcoming. The peon informed me that my requisition would be fulfilled on the following Thursday, as stationery is issued only on Thursdays to prevent misuse. I didn’t understand the logic. I had no alternative but to go home and bring papers for me to work on.

The next day, I visited the accounts department and reviewed the figures. The electricity cost was enormous, while the cost of stationery was minimal. Still, their system focus was on saving paper and keeping the air-conditioned room doors ajar thereby guzzling kilowatt hours of electricity. None had created a Pareto chart to identify the significant costs; instead, they focused on trivial ones.

I was assigned one staff member, and then another, and we collectively referred to our unit as the National Productivity Secretariat (NPS). This is how the NPS was formed, which now has a staff of over 600. There was a Productivity Steering Committee, which met periodically to provide us with guidance. We commenced a three-pronged approach to promoting productivity. One was a national campaign on mass media with talks on productivity. This was aimed at the general public and followed the method Singapore used so that the concept of getting more with less effort would catch on.

Fortunately, during this time, I learned that the BOI was also preparing a productivity campaign. I insisted that I must see the contents of their campaign so that it would be aligned with our campaign message. I was horrified when the first poster was presented by the advertising agency. It said something like Let’s improve productivity and let us shed one more drop of sweat. This was entirely against what we were promoting, which is that productivity yields more output with less effort. I asked the union member of our Steering Committee, and he totally agreed with my views. BOI decided to drop the campaign.

The second objective was to hold discussions and brief explanatory seminars for CEOs and senior executives of companies, as well as trade unions. We found several misconceptions among the private sector executives. The unions too had misconceptions and a fundamentally flawed view of productivity. The Ministry also took the unions on visits to BOI factories to demonstrate the good working conditions and facilities for the workers. The third strategy was to convince professional organisations, clubs and other non-commercial organisations to promote some activities related to productivity based on their profession.

All these were very successful. An example of the change of attitude of labour unions was seen when they held a conference on productivity. One union even went to the extent of saying that in the current globalised economy, the enemy is not management, but rather the external competitor. They promoted better labour-management relations. Despite this, there was one labour leader who said, “Productivity is bullshit, and labour-management relations should never be encouraged”. He went on to say that the labour must always be against management. There was no way he could be convinced to change his attitude.

The CEOs were taken on a field visit to Ceylon Tobacco Company, which had totally changed its attitude and had become an organisation with industrial harmony. The labour union also made a presentation. They admitted that the management had “opened their eyes” and now all were better off. Even at the end of the visit, there were die-hard CEOs who were sceptical and openly stated that labour could never be trusted.

The programmes for the general public were also well received. There were stories of how even shopkeepers rearranged their shops according to the 5S principles after listening to our radio programmes. I had a personal experience when a retired domestic aide visited us and stayed with us. When I came home after work and opened the fridge, I was surprised to see that everything was neatly arranged. I was informed that this lady came to Colombo from Matara, and the bus had the radio on, playing one of our weekly talks on productivity. The talk focused on the second step of the 5S method. This inspired her to try her hand at arranging based on the 5S method. I was surprised that the bus driver had such a talk on the sound system instead of a deafening blaring noise in the guise of music.

There were also some negative issues that I recall. One day, after a radio talk that went on the air, I was at home when the phone rang, and it was a complaint. “Mr Wijesinha, what you said makes sense, but the Ministry does not practice what you preach, because the large toilet on the Minister’s floor is used as a dump for old and discarded furniture”. I had no answer. I was only an advisor and had no authority to change. The incident occurred after my first monthly staff meeting, chaired by the Minister, when I pointed out that the first thing people see when they enter the Ministry from the Duplication road side is the broken chair of the security guard, with the rattan half removed.

I also pointed out the untidy wires, which were all loosely spread at the front of the building, giving it a very untidy appearance. The Chief Security Officer’s response was that the broken chair was deliberately placed at the gate because if a good chair is used, the security guard will sit on it comfortably and fall asleep. This was accepted, and the broken chair continued for months. That is why I decided to keep my mouth shut.

The Minister quickly learned all the productivity concepts and became familiar with the 5S methodology’s five steps. We had many seminars to promote productivity techniques, and he would always listen to my lecture and take notes. Gradually, he would, in his opening remarks, give my full lecture, leaving my lecture redundant. At least we had one person committed to productivity. Once, he called me to his office and told me, “We are lecturing others on productivity techniques, but why not implement them in the ministry too?”.

Thereafter, we initiated quality circles and 5S initiatives within the Ministry. There was excitement when we announced the inter-department 5S competition. On the day of the 5S audit with external auditors, the Minister also decided to join. He entered the room of an assistant secretary and found the place very disorganised and untidy. The Minister looked at me and said, “Sunil, what do you say in your seminars – is it that a cluttered mind creates a cluttered workplace or the other way round?”.

I didn’t open my mouth, but my popularity in the Ministry was going down a steep slope. Not everyone was enamoured by this new buzz of productivity. The Minister continued to other departments, asking them to open their drawers and looked into cupboards. Some had not taken notice of the competition at all and had not expected the Minister to visit and conduct an audit. A few other departments had performed very well. I recall that the Accounts Department won the contest the first time.

On the Minister’s instructions, we organised a full-day workshop on the progress of all SOEs under the Ministry. While some had implemented productivity techniques to some extent, others were grumbling that they were too busy. In fact, they were busy putting out fires and wasting effort because of low productivity. Some chairmen directly told me that they had enough matters on their plates without having to focus on productivity as well. I disagreed, having experienced the benefits of productivity first-hand, particularly during my tenure as Chairman of the ETF Board.

The professional associations took the idea up very well. The Institute of Supply Management held its conference on the theme of productivity. The Institute of Dental Specialists also held its conference with a productivity theme, prompting many amused contacts of mine, who inquired about what dental productivity meant. Some even asked whether it represents a ratio of the number of teeth pulled out per hour. The accounting institutes and the Institution of Engineers also implemented some activities.

At that time, I was the Senior Vice President of the Japan Sri Lanka Technical and Cultural Association (JASTECA). At the Ministry, we decided to request that JASTECA hold a 5S competition. I brought this to the next committee meeting of JASTECA, and it was agreed. A great well-wisher and a regular resource person, Mr Taiki Akimoto, who introduced us to 5S in a short one-hour session during one of his seminars on behaviour modelling, had suddenly passed away, the committee decided to organise the competition as the Taiki Akimoto 5S Award. Initially, the award ceremony was organised jointly with the Ministry of Industrial Development.

The next episode will contain other stories I experienced as the advisor on productivity.

Awardee of the APO Regional Award for promoting Productivity in the Asia Pacific Region

Recipient of the “Order of the Rising Sun, Gold and Silver Rays” from the Government of Japan.

Memories of my time at the Bandaranaike Centre for International Studies

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.