Sex Education in Schools

I have been reading opinions about the introduction of an overhauled system of education in schools next year. One of the controversial issues was closing of primary schools in rural areas due to low attendance in these schools; another being sex education to be included in the syllabus for Grade six kids, usually aged around 11 years.

Pity schools are being closed in rural areas with total attendance less than a hundred and paucity of teachers, often one managing and teaching all the students. An impossible task. But due to economic reasons and others like lack of adults to escort the kids to larger schools situated in towns nearby, many a child is deprived of education. Hence the suggestion that although schools with low attendance are closed down, affected children will be taken to a school and back home with the government providing buses and escorts.

A more controversial and generalized question is compulsory sex education for pre-puberty Grade six students. Archbishop Malcolm Cardinal Ranjith recently preached a sermon expressing his views on the subject and the view of the Roman Catholic Church, if not all Christians. The contents were reported in this newspaper. He brought in the opinion that the proposed sex education syllabus included deviant sexual preferences as blanketed by the term LGBTQ+. The acronym stands for the ever increasing group of lesbians, gay, bi and transsexuals, queers and others who are different from bisexual people. They are now quite a powerful lobby with their many hued flag. The Cardinal feared these persons would be accepted as equal to ‘normal’ sexually oriented men and women. A new gender is also being created to add to feminine and masculine genders.

As I believe, the Christian faith does not accept homosexuals as normal, nor even Christian. I do not know the religious attitude of Islam but Buddhism is tolerant and understands and accepts such who are born thus; not that they choose to be deviant. Homosexuality would have prevailed during the Buddha’s time – 2500 years ago. No censure at all then. Nor I believe from Hindus and Jains – two major religious in India.

Having been in a school hostel in Kandy from Grade six onward, admiring teachers, even senior students, was a common feature. There was nothing sexual in this, purely platonic. Girls were usually happy in school hostels, but being separated from the togetherness of family life, one tended to miss the warmth of a mother’s care and concern. Hence unknowingly, emotional satisfaction was sought from admiring someone older. We named it ‘running after’ but it was harmless.

More serious attachments were sometimes forged with hostel mates. There was the desire to be close to a friend, sleep with her if possible and some sort of special love grew. A bit of fondling would also arise. But this was all a passing phase and not to be cautious about. Once in a while it was serious and one or both partners would develop homosexual preferences; boys were irrelevant to them, even disliked.

Much later, a part of my job was conducting ‘conflict resolution’ workshops in schools, mostly out-of-Colombo. It was refreshing to spend about three hours with groups of students ranging in age from around 11 years to AL classes. One item was grouping them and the groups acting out conflicts in the home and their social milieu. The richer schools noticeably had children acting racial, religious conflicts.

It was the time of the LTTE so an oft acted theme was children having no bias but parents adversely influencing them. In the poorer schools travails of a home with a drunken father was often presented. The point that hit me forcefully was that coed schools had boys and girls mixing and acting together very comfortably. No barriers at all to easy camaraderie.

Not so in a Muslim school I went to. Principal objection was the getting together of boys and girls from the two branch schools. Once I insisted, I found the air in the hall we were in, palpable with sexuality. The way the boys and girls exchanged looks was, if I may mention so, disgusting. I realized it was due to all the gender taboos these students were subject to.

To come to the point of this article which is my opinion on sex education in schools. As a writer of a letter to the editor recently opined it is more urgent and relevant to impart information on drug abuse and prevention to school kids. Drug use is rampant in schools and getting graver. Knowing about dangerous drugs is much more important and urgent than deviant sex. But I say sex education is important and necessary: what evils prevail; how a child can be aware of sex predators and avoid them; how to act if approached and what help is available. The two issues can be included in the school syllabus but probably for Grade seven and above.

In the era we schooled, sex was a taboo subject. We got to know about the birds and the bees and human procreation through gossip with friends until we had biology classes. Thus we young ones were often under misconceptions, like if a boy kissed you, you would become pregnant. When our first period came on, we were scared unless friends had told us about this natural occurrence. Mothers hardly ever explained to daughters what to expect in their early teens. Perverts were absent then, so no recognition of LGBTs. But kids are so different now and life so open, as it were, that being told about sex and even perversions is necessary to children entering their teens.

Thus sex education should be introduced to schools but in a mild way, casually almost. No song and dance made about it, with greater emphasis on drug abuse.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.