Tea auction sees broader demand despite exporter pressures

The Low Growns, together with the Large Leaf teas from the High and Mid-Grown regions, continued to sell well.

An improved demand was seen for the Orthodox/Rotovane teas, following quality.

Notwithstanding the global uncertainties, placing increasing burdens on the exporters, the overall market reacted in a positive manner, perhaps on account of the declining volumes.

The Ex-Estate offerings comprised of 0.7 M/Kgs. There was an improved selection of teas both from the Western and Eastern sectors.

The Best Western BOPs, where the quality was improved, gained by Rs.50-100 per kilogramme and more following special inquiry for selected invoices.

The corresponding BOPFs – a few select invoices, gained by up to Rs.50 per kilogramme and more following special inquiry, whilst the others sold around last week’s levels.

In the Below Best category, the select BOP invoices were substantially dearer, whilst the others were firm and dearer to a lesser extent. The corresponding BOPFs sold around last week’s levels.

At the lower end of the market, the BOP/BOPFs continued to sell around last week’s levels. The Nuwara Eliya/Uda Pussellawas continued to be sluggish.

The Uva – select improved coloury BOPs, gained by Rs.50 per kilogramme and more, whilst the others were firm and dearer to a lesser extent.

The corresponding BOPFs followed a similar trend, with select coloury invoices appreciating by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme, whilst the others tended irregular and were barely steady.

The High and Mid Grown CTC teas – BP1s, had hardly any offerings. The PF1s – teas, with all-round leaf and liquors, sold around last, whilst the others were irregular. The corresponding Low Grown varieties sold well at firm to dearer rates.

The Low Growns totalled approximately 2.3 M/Kgs. All categories met with fair demand.

In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues, the BOP1s, together with the OP1s in general, were firm, whilst the balance was irregular. The OPs, in general, were firm.

The well-made OPAs were easier, whilst the balance sold around last levels. The Select Best and Best PEKs were selectively dearer, whilst the balance was firm.

The high-priced PEK1s were lower, whilst the balance sold around last levels.

In the Tippy catalogue, the well-made FBOPs, together with the cleaner Below Best and cleaner teas at the bottom, were firm, whilst the balance was irregular. The high-priced FF1s were easier, whilst the balance sold around last levels.

In the Premium catalogue, the very Tippy teas were easier, whilst the balance was sold around last levels. The teas at the bottom were irregular, following quality.