Is another Ditwah-like situation around the corner?

Colombo, Sep. 22 (Daily Mirror) - With memories of Cyclone Ditwah’s devastating floods and landslides still fresh, Sri Lanka could be heading into a critical October-November period, with meteorologists warning that El Niño conditions would intensify the country’s usual rainfall, strong winds and landslide risks.

Speaking to Daily Mirror, Deputy Director of Forecasting and Early Warning at the Meteorological Department, J.W. Karunaratna, said the prevailing rainy conditions could intensify further with the developing El Niño conditions.

A low-pressure area located over the Andaman Sea region of the Bay of Bengal is not expected to directly affect the island, however, the wind flow towards the system is expected to keep rainy conditions over the southwestern parts of the country.

He said even though there could be a slight reduction in rainfall after September 23, heavier rains above 100mm could return after September 27, making the coming period particularly important.

“October and November are critical months in terms of strong winds and landslides. We normally receive rain during this period, but with the El Niño situation, the conditions could be worse,” he said.

“Although it may not reach the magnitude of Ditwah, the impact could still be colossal,” Karunaratna said.

Meanwhile, the Irrigation Department has warned of rising river levels and possible minor flooding in several areas following significant rainfall across the wet zone.

Irrigation Director L.S. Sooriyabandara said rainfall had eased slightly compared to previous days, but showers were continuing.

The upper reaches of the Kelani River received between 100 mm and 125 mm of rain by this morning, while many other river basins recorded between 50 mm and 80 mm during the past 24 hours, he said.

More than 200 mm of rainfall recorded the previous day had pushed up water levels in the upper reaches of the Gin and Nilwala rivers, creating a risk of minor flooding in Baddegama, Udugama, Akuressa and Thalgahagoda.

The Kuda Ganga, a tributary of the Kalu Ganga, has also risen at Millakanda and is nearing minor flood levels.

Water levels in the Kelani River at Hanwella, Lenkoss and Avissawella remain high, while levels in the Mahaweli River at Nawalapitiya and Peradeniya and the Attanagalu Oya have declined but remain close to risk thresholds.

The latest developments come as Sri Lanka continues to recover from the devastating impact of Cyclone Ditwah, which triggered widespread flooding and landslides across the country last year.

Ditwah brought exceptionally heavy rainfall, causing rivers to overflow and triggering thousands of landslides, while affecting millions of people and causing extensive damage to homes, infrastructure and livelihoods.