The National Trust—Sri Lanka

The National Trust – Sri Lanka celebrated its 20th anniversary on November 26 at the College of Surgeons auditorium with special guests, Trustees and Members. It was an occasion to remember the unique legacy of Dr. Roland Silva, a distinguished archaeologist and architect who served as the Director of Archeology for many years and was responsible for initiating many heritage organizations in this country.

Exhibition on Dr. Roland Silva’s work by Dr. Sagara Jayasinghe of the University of Moratuwa

Trustee Dr. Kavan Ratnatunga gifting speaker Dr. Nilan Cooray with a copy of NT latest publication, The Story of Furniture in Sri Lanka

Intangible Heritage Publications gold medal winner Mr. T.M Gunawardana with Mrs. Neela Silva and NT Vice President Prof. D.P Chandrasekara

This year, three organizations founded by Dr. Roland Silva, the Central Cultural Fund (CCF), ICOMOS Sri Lanka and the National Trust Sri Lanka (NT) are celebrating his legacy. The CCF and ICOMOS Sri Lanka organized in October, a national conference titled Beyond Roland Silva: Charting New Frontiers in Sri Lanka’s Cultural Heritage, recalling that in 1990 in a historic and unanimous decision, Dr. Roland Silva was elected the first non-European President of the global organization ICOMOS International, serving for three consecutive terms. A special film and exhibition curated by Dr Sagara Jayasinghe of ICOMOS Sri Lanka described Dr. Roland’s unique achievements and the inspiration he provides to so many young professionals to continue this work for the sake of future generations.

Elu3168y3r0jq_tmp_8de0c54cc25a47cc ven after retirement, Dr Roland’s dedication continued through the founding of the National Trust- Sri Lanka, promoting collaboration between professionals and the public in safeguarding the nation’s heritage. He launched the series of best-selling coffee table publications which today provides the foundation of financial stability for this voluntary organization.

National Trust President Dr. Sarala Fernando recalled how the Trust has grown from its founding with a voluntary group of archaeologists and architects and no funds, to its distinguished board of Trustees today with a solid financial standing.

A highlight of the National Trust celebration was an inspiring oration by Dr. Nilan Cooray, the Director General of the Central Cultural Fund, recalling Dr. Roland’s many achievements both at the national and international levels and how today new technologies are taking heritage conservation to unprecedented heights.

Trustee Kavan Ratnatunga presented Dr. Nilan Cooray with the first copy of the newest National Trust publication: The Story of Furniture in Sri Lanka.

The National Trust 20th Anniversary celebration featured the award ceremony for the open competition launched by former National Trust President Professor Nimal de Silva for publications on intangible heritage in the three languages. The jury of senior academics led by Professor D.P. Chandrasekara Senior, Vice President National Trust made the awards as follows:

First Prize – Gold Medal, Certificate and Rs. 100,000/=, awarded to T.M. Gunawardana for his publication Urumaya Ahimi Veddo, three Second Prizes, Silver Medals Certificates and Rs. 50,000/= awarded each to Mahinda K. Wimalasiri for his publication Horanewa- The unique Symbol of Sri Lankan Traditional and Indigenous Folk Music, to Yasanjali Devika Jayathilaka for her publication Siri Laka Wedi Katha and to Hayathri Shanmuganathan for her publication Sottkalal Nilam Kadanthavarkal (Who crossed the borders with their words- review of Sri Lankan women’s articles).

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.