ADB supports modern pipe distribution network systems for agriculture in Sri Lanka

The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has approved a $ 3 million grant to help address water shortages in Sri Lanka’s North Western and Uva Provinces by constructing modern pipe distribution network (PDN) systems.

The project will provide irrigation to 877 hectares (ha) of farmland, supporting improvements in the country’s agriculture sector.

The Transforming Irrigation Systems for Improved Food Security Project is funded by the Japan Fund for Prosperous and Resilient Asia and the Pacific (JFPR) financed by the Government of Japan through the ADB.

The project will construct four modern PDN systems on a pilot basis and provide technical and institutional lessons to demonstrate its benefits to 943 farming households. Wider adoption of the irrigation technology will be rolled out in Sri Lanka in the geographical areas covered by the ADB-proposed second stage of the Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program.

ADB Country Director for Sri Lanka Takafumi Kadono said: “The ADB is proud to partner with the Government of Japan to support Sri Lanka’s agricultural production by piloting the use of PDN systems in rainfed lands and canal-based irrigated lands. PDN systems improve water use efficiency, can be operated on demand, and are well suited in water-scarce conditions. Seasonal rainwater, particularly in the dry zone, limits farmers’ maximisation of land use, and compromises food security and economic returns.”

Two small-scale gravity PDN systems and a pumped pressure PDN system in the North Western Province, and a large-scale gravity PDN system in the Uva Province will be constructed to provide water for paddy and upland crops. Many smallholder farmers in these provinces cultivate crops under major, medium, and minor irrigation systems, as well as rainfed conditions. Located within the dry and intermediate climatic zones, these regions are vulnerable to climate change. The installation of high-efficiency PDN systems will minimise conveyance losses associated with canal-based irrigation, improve water-use efficiency through on-demand irrigation, and enable cultivation of high-value crops in the uplands.

Sri Lanka was hit by Cyclone Ditwah in late November, resulting in the country’s worst flood in two decades and the deadliest natural hazard since the 2004 tsunami. The disaster damaged over 160,000 ha of paddy fields, along with nearly 96,000 ha of other crops and 13,500 ha of vegetables. Through its support, the ADB contributes to building back better and stronger, helping communities recover from disasters while enhancing long-term resilience.