GI systems seen as vital for SL’s transition to a value-driven economy

Sri Lanka’s journey toward a resilient, value-driven economy can find a powerful ally in Geographical Indications (GIs) — a globally recognised tool that links unique products with their origin, quality, and heritage.

Speaking at a recent forum, Institute of Policy Studies (IPS) Research Economist Dilani Hirimuthugodage highlighted the immense potential of GIs in unlocking Sri Lanka’s economic strength, particularly through agriculture and rural enterprise.

“GI systems are important to Sri Lanka in many ways — legally, economically, politically and socially. But I will mainly focus on the economic perspective, she said, explaining that GIs offer high price premiums, increase farmer incomes, boost exports and foster rural development.

She stressed that as a member of the World Trade Organization, Sri Lanka is obliged to protect its intellectual property rights under the Intellectual Property Act of 2003, which includes GIs.

Drawing from regional success stories, she pointed out how Kampot Pepper from Cambodia saw prices soar from USD 4.5 per kilo in 2009 to USD 15 in 2020 after GI registration — a 200% increase. Similarly, Muntok White Pepper from Indonesia recorded a 475% price growth between 2010 and 2015, while production rose from 3,000 to 10,000 tons. Thailand’s Hom Mali Rice, registered in 2013, achieved a 40% rise in export value within five years.

“These examples show that GI registration increases not only price and demand but also production and export volumes, she said. A 2020 European Union study found that GI products sell at an average premium of 2.23 times more than comparable non-GI products, as consumers are willing to pay more for quality and authenticity.

Sri Lanka achieved a major milestone in February 2025 with the launch of its national GI registry by the National Intellectual Property Office (NIPO), supported by UNIDO and the EU’s EDP project. The first registration, Ceylon Cinnamon, stands as a global symbol of quality. Studies are now underway for potential GI recognition of Ceylon Gold Pineapple, Colombo Pepper, Cashew, and King Coconut.

To unlock the full potential of GIs, Hirimuthugodage emphasised the need to strengthen institutional capacity, introduce a national GI logo, create a dedicated GI division within NIPO and establish a GI council involving key industry stakeholders.

She also urged enhanced transparency through an online GI registry, improved certification and traceability, and greater public–private partnerships to promote innovation and export readiness.

Female-led biz service provider invests over Rs 300 million in three premium venues in Colombo

DFCC Aloka drives women’s empowerment in Jaffna with Evolution Auto

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.