Dilmah’s ECHS Bridges Kindness and Quality to Nurture the Next Generation of Chefs

The Empower Culinary & Hospitality School (ECHS), established by Dilmah and the MJF Charitable Foundation, recently held the graduation of 56 young culinary professionals as they take the first step of their burgeoning careers in the hospitality industry.

As the culinary artisans, decked in their chef whites walked up to the stage to receive their certificates or put the finishing touches to the graduation dinner prepared for the special invitees, the image created is a reflection of the greater impact of the Foundation’s programmes such as ECHS.

Established in 2016, ECHS was founded as an inclusive and impact driven culinary training facility to equip youth facing socioeconomic challenges with professional training that combines practical skills, theoretical knowledge, and personal development.

For Dilhan C. Fernando, Chairman/CEO – Dilmah Tea, Trustee of the MJF Charitable Foundation and Governor of the Board of ECHS, the school represents the bridging of quality, high standards and values close to his family’s heart. It was an idea that sparked through his own experiences of working closely with internationally acclaimed, Black Hat award winning chef, Bernd Uber. He said, “Bernd showed me the discipline that is required to become a chef.” This, combined with his father Dilmah founder Merrill J. Fernando’s philosophy of kindness provided the foundation for ECHS.

Accredited by the World Association of Chefs Societies (WACS) and the Tertiary and Vocational Education Commission (TVEC), ECHS has produced 352 graduates from low-income and vulnerable communities to date from two facilities located in Moratuwa (ECHS West) and Kalkudah (ECHS East).

ECHS offers a Certificate Course in Cooking for youth with G.C.E. Ordinary Level passes as well as a shorter three-month Pastry and Bakery Course. The rigorous curriculum is meticulously designed for industry readiness, with theoretical training and vital IT training and Business English classes to ensure they function as holistic working professionals.

Education extends to practical internships at recognised hotels and real-world experience. This is sustainably driven through the MJF Foundation’s other programmes – People’s Market events and the Good Heart Café. Another unique feature of the ECHS curriculum is modules focusing on organic and urban gardening where students tend to their own crops, fostering an understanding of ingredient sourcing and sustainability.

In nurturing holistic, skilled professionals, ECHS supports Sri Lanka’s domestic labour force amidst growing challenges of international migration and national unemployment. This year, the Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment (SLBFE) reported that 144,379 Sri Lankans sought employment abroad during the first six months of 2025, with nearly 78% of departures in the first quarter concentrated in the skilled category. This outflow highlights a potential shortage in skilled local labour.

The recent graduation has seen almost 100% employability of its graduates, proving the model to be a crucial solution by offering international-standard training, creating a pathway to sustainable employment, and enabling diversification of skills and entrepreneurship.

The school’s impact is powerfully illustrated by its alumni: W. Dinesh, from the Kahawatte Plantations, achieved national recognition by winning the Bocuse d’Or Sri Lanka (2017). Several of the School’s other alumni include national and international award-winning chefs, restauranteurs and entrepreneurs. The institution is also inclusive, having graduated a total of eight youth with disabilities since its inception.

At the graduation, Dilhan C. Fernando highlighted the institution’s distinctive philosophy. “Our commitment to being a premier culinary training facility is founded not just on our curriculum, but on teaching kindness and values — a vision stemming from my father’s belief that business is a matter of human service.”

ECHS is a reflection of the MJF Charitable Foundation as part of their commitment towards empowering and supporting low income communities, children and adults with disabilities and the larger community through entrepreneurship, education and healthcare. At least 15% of pre-tax profits from the MJF Group are directed towards supporting humanitarian and conservation efforts in line with the Dilmah Founder’s vision To Make The World A Better Tea.

Learn more about the work of the MJF Charitable Foundation at https://www.facebook.com/MJFCF/ and  https://www.instagram.com/mjffoundation/.

“Gift of Protection” from HNBA offering Rs. 1 Million free Life Cover to its customers affected by Cyclone Ditwah

Dialog and UnionPay International Join Forces to Elevate Sri Lanka’s Digital Payment Landscape

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.