$ 52.5 m YOLO project by Prime Group gets BOI approval

From left: Prime Group Finance Director Anura Pathirage, CEO Ruminda Randeniya, BOI Board Members Sujeewa Mudalige and Dr. Ruvini Fernando

Prime Group yesterday said its landmark project ‘YOLO by Prime Group’ has received approval from the Board of Investment of Sri Lanka (BOI), recognising the development’s strong potential to drive economic development and attract foreign investment, delivering strong urban appeal.

Accordingly, a $ 52.5 million investment agreement has been inked between Prime Group and the Board of Investment of Sri Lanka (BOI).

Located in Makola Kiribathgoda, YOLO by Prime Group is a residential development designed to redefine elevated urban living. Just 5 minutes from the Kadawatha Highway Entrance, the project offers seamless connectivity to major cities including Kandy, Kurunegala, Galle, Matara, and Hambantota within 1½–2 hours, and Colombo is less than 30 minutes away. Situated in a flood- and landslide-free zone, YOLO is built on 13 acres and comprises 476 apartments with 46 buildings. Each features a 2,000 sq. ft. rooftop garden with BBQ and dining areas.

The project offers a diverse mix of 2- and 3-bedroom apartments complemented by over 100,000 sq. ft. of shared premium facilities. Amenities include a 3-lane bowling alley, cinema, coffee shop, co-working space and business lounge, karaoke club, coin-operated laundry, mini supermarket, swimming pool with pool bar, fully equipped gym and CrossFit gym, paddle court and sports club, jogging path, and a celebration hall.

In a statement the company said construction is progressing on schedule and all units advancing as planned to meet promised specifications and timelines. Designed in 2024, YOLO by Prime Group features a modern, future-ready architectural vision, seamlessly blending contemporary design with innovative elements, redefining elevated urban living.

Apart from the architectural and lifestyle appeal, YOLO by Prime Group is designed to generate direct and indirect employment in construction, property management, maintenance, and service sectors, contributing to national economic growth. Located in Kiribathgoda, a growing real estate corridor with strong connectivity and infrastructure, the project offers an attractive opportunity for local and international investors.

Apartments begin from Rs. 35 million with a 1% monthly, 100% interest-free payment plan. The project is designed for capital appreciation and rental potential, with investors having the opportunity to achieve up to 100% return on investment, the company said.