Lihini Fernando awarded prestigious 2026 Eisenhower Fellowship

Attorney-at-Law and Velox Partners Co-Founder Lihini Fernando has been selected to be among 24 global leaders to participate at the Eisenhower Fellowship (EF) for 2026.

The EF has selected 24 global leaders from government, business, and civil society to take part in a six-week fellowship in the US, enabling them to exchange knowledge and ideas with the leading experts in their respective fields.

These Fellows, representing 24 countries including Asia and Africa, will participate in EF’s spring Global Program from 5 April to 14 May.

With a distinguished history, the EF, from its start as a unique birthday gift to honour America’s 34th President to its current range of innovative programs for talented leaders from 115 countries, has prepared over 2,600 men and women to excel in their chosen fields.

The EF’s mission is to identify, empower, and connect innovative leaders through a transformative fellowship experience and lifelong engagement in a global network of dynamic change agents committed to creating a world more peaceful, prosperous, and just.

Fernando, a politician, a Member of the Council, Founding Member of NextGen Sri Lanka, and Co-Founding Partner at Velox Partners, a Sri Lankan law firm and legal process outsourcing company providing tech-enabled legal services across Asia, has been a leading advocate for women’s representation in politics and rule of law.

Fernando has also contributed to policy reforms and political training initiatives led by the Republican Institute and Westminster Foundation for Democracy.

On Fellowship, Fernando plans to establish community-based legal aid centres to provide free legal aid to underprivileged individuals who lack access to formal avenues of justice. She also intends to advance initiatives focused on women’s empowerment and increasing women’s participation and representation in politics.

“I have been involved in women leadership and policy issues related to women. My focus is the rights of women to empower her. I will be meeting political leaders and organisations that work in this space in the States during my stay at the Fellowship. I will be working on these areas with more emphasis once I return from there,” she said.