Shield Restraint Systems unveils state-of-the-art manufacturing facility with $ 8.5 m investment

Shield Restraint Systems Ltd., has officially opened its cutting-edge manufacturing facility at the Export Processing Zone, Wathupitiwala, Nittambuwa, marking a significant milestone in Sri Lanka’s industrial development and foreign investment landscape.

The event was attended by senior executives from the United States, including TransDigm Inc., Executive Vice President Kevin McHenry and Shield Restraint Systems President Dennis Pursel along with Shield’s executive team. Their presence demonstrated the company’s commitment to expanding manufacturing operations and international partnerships.

Key Sri Lankan officials were also present, including BOI Chairman Arjuna Herath, Director General Renuka Weerakone, and other BOI executives. Representatives from the US Department of Commerce and US Embassy in Sri Lanka attended as well, emphasising the strong economic relationship between the two countries.

Shield Restraint Systems (Pvt) Ltd represents the Group’s latest strategic investment in the country, manufacturing a comprehensive range of safety products for applications spanning child safety seats, commercial vehicles, construction and agricultural equipment, and amusement park rides. Shield has manufacturing facilities in Elkhart, Indiana, and Kunshan, China, and the new Sri Lankan facility marks Shield’s strategic expansion into South Asia.

The USD 8.5 million project comprises of a state-of-the-art 100,000 sq ft manufacturing facility that will serve as a cornerstone for the company’s global operations. While the facility opens today at its 10% capacity, the full-scale operation is projected to create 500 job opportunities and generate USD 50 million in annual revenue. The facility’s operations will generate substantial economic benefits for Sri Lanka, including significant tax contributions that will support local economy. The project represents more than immediate job creation but also signals long-term commitment to Sri Lanka’s economic growth.

The current geopolitical landscape has created unique opportunities while the established success and the proven track record of the sister company AmSafe Bridport Ltd., provided Shield with useful insights into the country’s manufacturing capabilities and business environment. Also, the country’s logistics infrastructure, including excellent shipping routes and accessible supply chain networks, provides a distinctive advantage for serving global markets. The demonstrated manufacturing resilience, maintaining operations and quality standards even under extreme condition and the highly skilled and willing labour force made Sri Lanka the best choice for Shield’s move.

AmSafe Sri Lanka General Manager Chandani Ekanayake who was instrumental in bringing this investment to Sri Lanka stated, “This project represents years of establishing Sri Lanka as a profitable investment hub with our business owners. What we have realised through the journey in establishing Shield in Sri Lanka is that we have to anticipate significant improvements in the efficiency and transparency of administrative processes. The long-awaited policy reforms should focus on establishing a true one-stop service that encourages investors to operate with confidence.

We look forward to working with authorities who adopt broader thinking patterns, who view the bigger picture and embrace a pragmatic solution-based approach. Only through such collaboration can Sri Lanka realise its full potential as a genuinely competitive and attractive destination for global investment.”

Ekanayake further went on to say that, “Establishing this facility is just the beginning of our investment journey in Sri Lanka. We’re currently looking at future opportunities which could exceed $ 17 million in investment value. We remain deeply committed to contributing to the nation’s economic progress through sustainable, long-term partnerships that create meaningful opportunities for local communities and strengthen Sri Lanka’s position as a hub for global investment.”