“To make coal white, it’s foolish to wash it in milk’’

Generation – Z Sri Lankans may not remember purchasing inverters, generators, rechargeable lamps & even sleeping in vehicles with air conditioners running during power cuts in the early 2000s. Power shortages were due to increased demand, insufficient hydro power, unfair trade union actions & petty political blockages etc. Requesting tech savvy Gen – Z to use AI to learn history may be seen as taking coal to ‘Newcastle’ but they should update to prevent them being used to de-establish the country.

At a time when power cuts were used to de-establish governments, Sri Lankans with help from Chinese engineers started constructing their largest power plant in Norochcholai in 2006 during Mahinda Rajapaksa rule. AKA ‘Lakvijaya’, the final phase of Norochcholai coal power plant was commissioned by Presidents Xi Jinping of China & Mahinda on 16th September 2014 (Ref. Media). At the ceremony President Mahinda announced a reduction of electricity tariffs lighting hope for those conflict with cost of living. ‘Lakvijaya’ which resolved many conflicts, recently provoked a conflict which might have marooned the Maroons with the resignations of a minister & a secretary.

As mentioned, petty political obstructions shall remain. Learning from past mistakes Sri Lankans of all colours should unite to resolve power & energy issues. With the ‘Lakvijaya’ asset in hand, they may study how coal can be made more efficient. China’s greener coal technology is believed to have a positive impact on global power needs.

Chinese researchers have developed a strategy to reduce energy consumption when converting ‘syngas’ to light olefins. This method which operates comparatively at lower temperatures & pressure offers cleaner & more efficient paths for coal utilization. This technology which can mobilize coal as an alternative to oil & gas during a crisis is important for energy security. Coal dependent small nations may adapt similar technologies to face energy related challenges as countries such as Germany also still depend on coal for approx. 20% of its power supply (Ref. Media). China has also advanced coal technology by testing world’s first 630 C thermal power unit achieving more than 50% thermal efficiency enabling large scale application of advanced materials (Ref. Chinese Media). China sees coal as a ‘ballast stone’ for energy security. Sri Lankans should stop throwing stones, listen to critiques (Vimarsha – in Telegu) & resolve conflicts. Economic opportunities coming with China’s Belt & Road Initiative (BRI) should be grabbed to energize the fragile economy.

The first human who hurled an insult instead of a stone was the founder of civilization – Sigmund Freud.

Sri Lanka’s Toastmasters Movement gears up for Ovation 2026 powered by Home Lands

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.