Leading brands bag top awards at 11th CMA Sri Lanka Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2025

Overall winners: Bronze Award – Overall Second Runner-Up (Joint): Hayleys Fabric, LB Finance; Silver Award – Overall First Runner-Up (Joint): Commercial Bank, John Keells Holdings; Gold Award – Overall Winner (Joint): Softlogic Life Insurance, Talawakelle Tea Estates; Diamond Award – Overall Winner: Diesel & Motor Engineering

The Institute of Certified Management Accountants of Sri Lanka (CMA Sri Lanka) together with its Strategic Partner Colombo Stock Exchange successfully hosted the 11th Annual CMA Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2025 on Monday, 17 November 2025, at the Hotel Cinnamon Life, The Forum.

The event celebrated outstanding achievements in corporate reporting and recognised organisations that have demonstrated leadership in transparency, accountability, and sustainable value creation beneficial to all stakeholders including employees, customers, suppliers, business partners, local communities, legislators, regulators and policy makers.

The Chief Guest was Labour Minister and Deputy Minister of Finance and Economic Development Prof. Anil Jayantha Fernando, Guest of Honour International Federation of Accountants President Jean Bouquot, Special Guest of Honour Former Supreme Court Judge of South Africa Prof. Mervyn King, Keynote Speaker and Chairman Panel of Judges Prof. Ho Yew Kee, Guest of Houour Colombo Stock Exchange CEO Rajeeva Bandaranayake together with CMA Sri Lanka President and CMA Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2025 Chairman Prof. Lakshman R. Watawala.

Prof. Lakshman R. Watawala, Founder President of CMA Sri Lanka and Chairman of the CMA Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2025, delivered the welcome address, emphasising the importance of integrated thinking in shaping resilient and future-ready organisations.

The event featured addresses by several key dignitaries, including Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) CEO Rajeeva Bandaranaike, who reaffirmed the CSE’s commitment as Strategic Partner to support Integrated Reporting, advancing corporate transparency and sustainable value creation in Sri Lanka.

International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) President Jean Bouquot, congratulated CMA Sri Lanka for strengthening global sustainability practices through integrated reporting and stated he would visit Sri Lanka in January next year to provide the global recognition to CMA Sri Lanka and the other IFAC members.

International Integrated Reporting Council and Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) former Chairman Prof. Mervin King shared insights on the evolving global landscape of corporate governance and sustainability disclosures.

The keynote address was delivered by Panel of Judges Chairman Prof. Ho Yew Kee, who emphasised the importance of robust reporting frameworks in building stakeholder confidence and long-term economic stability. Also congratulated all companies as he had seen the growth and development of Integrated Reporting in Sri Lanka during the last 11 years with many companies submitting outstanding reports making Sri Lanka recognised globally in Integrated Reporting.

The Chief Guest, Labour Minister and Finance and Economic Development Deputy Minister Prof. Anil Jayantha Fernando, highlighted the vital role of integrated reporting in enhancing national and corporate competitiveness and the great role played by CMA Sri Lanka and was proud he was a Fellow Member.

Throughout the evening, awards were presented across multiple categories, including:

The highlight of the ceremony was the presentation of the Overall Awards, which included the Bronze, Silver, and Gold Awards won jointly by Soft Logic Life and Talawakelle Plantations, culminating in the prestigious Diamond Award won by DIMO for the most outstanding integrated report of 2025. Winners delivered short acceptance speeches, expressing their commitment to upholding best practices in integrated reporting and sustainability.

Through this recognition of outstanding Integrated Reports by quoted companies, CMA Sri Lanka reaffirms its commitment to fostering excellence, integrated thinking, encouraging innovation, value creation and promoting corporate behaviours that build stakeholder confidence and global competitiveness.