eChannelling introduces ‘eHomecare’ as SL’s first doctor-led elderly care service

Supporting families with medically supervised care for elderly individuals in the comfort of their own homes, SLT-MOBITEL and eChannelling PLC, in partnership with medical experts from Golden Years Care, have introduced eHomecare’, Sri Lanka’s first doctor‑led elderly‑care service.

The pioneering initiative is designed to address a growing societal need. The service launched by eChannelling, Sri Lanka’s leading digital healthcare solutions provider, brings together the technological capabilities of SLT-MOBITEL with eChannelling’s healthcare expertise and Golden Years Care’s extensive experience in compassionate home-based support, ensuring quality standards throughout the program.

With increasing migration, many adult children are now living or working abroad, leaving their elderly parents alone in Sri Lanka. For many seniors, mobility challenges make it difficult to access hospitals for routine checkups, medication, or urgent medical attention. eHomecare seeks to fill this critical gap, offering a structured, reliable, and compassionate solution for families navigating these challenges.

The purpose of eHomecare is to support families in assuring their elderly loved ones receive the medical care they need, even when children are living overseas or occupied with demanding careers, guaranteeing elderly individuals are supported with dignity.

eHomecare provides families with a safe and trustworthy platform to arrange professional doctor‑led home visits, benefit from real‑time assessments and guidance from qualified healthcare professionals and ensure the elderly are supported with holistic care.

More than a convenience, eHomecare is a vital solution to a pressing social concern, offering peace of mind to families and guaranteeing seniors receive the respect, and medical attention they deserve.

Key features of the service include doctor-led home visits providing personalized care tailored to individual health needs, continuous assessment and recommendations for ongoing care for optimal health management, prompt medical attention during emergencies, with qualified healthcare professionals available when needed and a comprehensive, professional, and trustworthy approach to elderly care that prioritizes dignity and wellbeing.

Through eHomecare, families gain access to a reliable network of medical professionals who understand the unique needs of elderly individuals. The service bridges the distance between overseas children and their aging parents, with medical support, and emotional reassurance that loved ones are being cared for with compassion and expertise.

AIA provided urgent medical relief to flood-affected families in Thalwatta

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.