NPP MP seeks dismissal of BASL petition on 22nd Amendment

Colombo, August 27 (Daily Mirror) - National People’s Power (NPP) Parliamentarian Lakshman Nipuna Arachchi has filed an intervenient petition in the Supreme Court seeking an order to dismiss the Special Determination petition filed by two office-bearers of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) against the proposed Twenty-Second Amendment to the Constitution.

BASL Treasurer T.M.S. Pasindu Silva and Assistant Secretary Lakitha Isiwara Wakishta Arachchi had earlier filed a Special Determination petition challenging the constitutionality of the Bill titled “Twenty-Second Amendment to the Constitution”, arguing that the proposed changes undermine the independence of the Judiciary and require approval by the People at a referendum.

Nipuna Arachchi requested the Supreme Court to permit him to intervene in the proceedings and participate through counsel in the hearing of the BASL petition challenging the proposed constitutional amendment.

In his petition, Nipuna Arachchi rejects several central positions advanced by the BASL petitioners, describing them as baseless, without foundation or untenable in law.

Among the issues challenged by him is the BASL’s contention that there had been inadequate stakeholder consultation over the proposed amendment.

He further challenges the arguments relating to bypassing the Constitutional Council mechanism, the proposal for a referendum as a solution to an alleged conflict of interest involving the Supreme Court, and the request for the matter to be heard by a Full Court.

According to his petition, the Twenty-Second Amendment Bill seeks to increase the retirement age of judges of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal, make provision regarding the retirement date of the Chief Justice and increase the number of judges of the Court of Appeal.

The NPP parliamentarian maintains that the Bill and its provisions are not inconsistent with the Preamble to the Constitution, Articles 3 and 4(c), Articles 75 and 76, the Rule of Law, judicial independence or the principle of constitutionalism.

He further argues that the proposed amendment falls within the legislative competence of Parliament and does not require approval by the people at a referendum under Article 83.

The NPP MP has also requested the Court to declare or order that the Twenty-Second Amendment Bill as a whole and/or any of its clauses is not inconsistent with Article 3 of the Constitution and does not require approval at a referendum.

He has further sought the dismissal of the BASL petition, refusal of the reliefs sought by the BASL petitioners, costs and any other relief the Court considers appropriate.