New policy framework for stock market deposits seen as a boon for companies

The government’s new policy framework to allocate a maximum interest rate for stock market deposits would pave the way for companies and investors to plan their future business activities, a senior stockbroker said.

‘Accordingly, the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) has entered a period of strong revival, supported by economic stabilization and rising investor confidence while significant market reforms would support the new policy framework on interest, Assistant Vice President Softlogic Stockbrokers, Eardly Kern, told The Island Financial Review.

He said that the imposition of maximum interest rates for stock market deposits would prevent the interest rates from moving upwards, thus paving the way for investors to invest in stocks with a lot of confidence.

Kern added: ‘The CSE outlook would provide expanding opportunities for investors as Sri Lanka positions itself for market-led investor platforms.

‘Improving macro fundamentals, such as lower interest rates, rising corporate earnings and historically attractive valuations, have been key catalysts in driving investment into the equities market.

‘These tailwinds, together with ongoing economic reforms, have helped re-establish confidence among both local and foreign investors.

‘Over the past two years, the number of CDS accounts has surpassed 949,000, with digital on-boarding through the CSE mobile app driving the latest surge.

‘Further, foreign inflows for 2024 amounted to USD 66.5 million, while Rs 175 billion was raised through capital market activity, including 16 new listings. With a target of 20 IPOs on the horizon, the CSE anticipates several new companies entering the market by early 2026.

‘The All Share Price Index (ASPI) delivered an impressive 49.7 percent return in 2024, ranking the CSE as the second-best performing market in Asia for the year. By November 2025, the index had risen a further 45.65 percent amounting to an extraordinary two-year return of approximately 95 percent.

‘The S&P SL20 Index recorded a parallel recovery, gaining 58.5 percent in 2024 and 31.84 percent so far in 2025.

‘ Despite the rally, the CSE continues to trade below its 10-year average PER and valuations remain significantly more attractive than in regional markets, such as, India, Malaysia, Vietnam, and China.

‘ Turnover has surged to Rs 1.06 trillion in 2025 (as of mid-November), nearly doubling the figure recorded in 2024. Market capitalization grew 34 percent n 2024, despite only around 40,000 active investors capturing most of the gains—highlighting the potential for broader participation.

‘ Corporate earnings have also strengthened markedly. After generating Rs 686 billion in earnings during 2024—a 50% year-on-year increase—listed entities are projected to deliver between Rs 775–800 billion in 2025. Earnings for the first half of 2025 have already grown 57 percent year-on-year.’

Bourse trading reaches remarkable heights; turnover exceeds Rs. 9 billion

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.