Untangling the wage issue

Budget 2026 is under intense scrutiny. It is being viewed through various lenses, and opinion is divided thereon, as is the case with all budgets in this country, where political battles pass for economic debates. A section of the business community has praised the NPP government’s budget, and its positive response will surely go a long way towards building investor confidence. However, not all economic analysts are well-disposed towards the budget. They have taken exception to some expenditure and revenue proposals. Issues that are usually raised about budgets are political and economic, but this time around, there is a legal one.

The government’s decision to grant plantation workers an attendance incentive of Rs. 200 each a day from state funds has stirred a controversy. It has gone down well with the estate workers, who are crying out for relief. In fact, nobody is opposing a wage hike for the plantation workers, whose lot must be improved. However, it is being argued in some quarters that there is no legal provision for allocating state funds for that purpose, and the budget proposal at issue, if implemented, could lead to a transgression. Some SJB MPs are among the proponents of this view. Their argument is not without some merit, which the Finance Ministry should take cognisance of.

The knee-jerk reaction of the government to the criticism of its wage proposal has been to lash out at the Opposition, claiming that it is trying to scuttle the proposed incentive scheme. Government politicians and their propagandists should have countered the argument in question instead of taking on the proponents of it. They have thus given a political twist to an otherwise legal issue that needs to be discussed in Parliament extensively. Binary thinking hinders practical progress in a debate on any vital issue, and all views should be taken into consideration for a viable solution to be adopted.

Opposition and SJB Leader Sajith Premadasa has made a statement on the proposed wage hike for estate workers. Agreeing that all estate workers deserve the wage hike the government has proposed, he has said that ideally the plantation companies should bear the cost thereof fully. He has suggested that some of the uncultivated land in the plantation areas be distributed among estate workers so that they, too, could become tea smallholders.

Currently, 60–70% of plantation land is owned by the state and private companies, yet they contribute only about 30% to the national tea production. In contrast, small-scale tea estate owners, who hold about 30% of the land, contribute 60–70% of the country’s total tea output, Premadasa has pointed, claiming that transferring uncultivated land to unemployed youth and plantation workers will stand them in good stead and give a fillip to the country’s economic development. Most estate sector youth opt for what is known as livelihood diversification and migrate to cities seeking non-farm work. This is bound to aggravate the labour shortage in the plantation sector.

Previous governments were accused of paying lip service to the plantation workers’ cause, but the incumbent administration has plucked up the courage to grasp the nettle. However, there is a complaint that the views of the plantation companies on wage revisions and their impact have not been heeded.

There have been some studies on the issue of plantation sector wages, but they are far from thorough, and the remedies so far adopted have been piecemeal. There is a need for a comprehensive study on the issue and a discussion on its findings with the participation of all stakeholders, especially the government, representatives of the plantation companies, and trade unions and other organisations representing plantation workers’ interests. Such a realistic assessment of the situation will help find a sustainable solution to the plantation workers’ wages and ensure the wellbeing of the estate sector, which is experiencing various difficulties and challenges.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.