A decade strong: Suren Cooke Agencies with Xterm redefined pest termite control

Xterm Termite Baiting System celebrates 10-years of transforming Sri Lanka’s termite control landscape. Since its introduction to the local market in 2015, this game-changing solution has shifted termite management practices away from traditional liquid chemical applications that is more efficient, environmentally friendly and non-intrusive approach that eliminates the entire termite colony, including the queen.

The successful use of Xterm across the county was made possible through a partnership between Sri Lanka’s leading pest management firm, Suren Cooke Agencies and Sumitomo Chemical Asia.

“As a termite management solution, Xterm has eliminated the need for drilling of the floors or foundations”, said Sheran Cooke, Director of Suren Cooke Agencies.

The first decade of Xterm has also played a crucial role in successfully managing termites in Sri Lanka’s rapidly growing high-rise buildings, condominiums and apartment complexes.

Cooke added, “Xterm filled a critical need by providing a practical, non-intrusive solution for termite management for high-rise buildings. The solution has also proven valuable in safeguarding Sri Lanka’s iconic landmarks and archaeologically protected sites where drilling or structural alterations are strictly prohibited. Due to these factors Sri Lankan market has positively embraced the product over the past 10 years.”

The product has also been highly successful in termite management in warehouses and food facilities, as this does not cause any interruptions to daily operations during termite control unlike in traditional liquid application method which requires the clearance of the premises.

Xterm Termite Bating has also delivered sustainability benefits by preventing the release of large volumes of chemicals each year in treating infestations, thereby making a positive contribution to environmental protection.

Sri Lankan pride, global glory: Solar Booze sweeps Service and Performance Excellence Awards

Submission of the extraordinary gazette notifications published in relation to the gem industry to  Parliament for its concurrence

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.