Growing up as a Catholic boy in Hambantota

My father passed the English Trained Teachers’ Examination with first-class honours in 1951. He soon secured an assistant teacher position at Holy Cross College, his alma mater, in Kalutara. He was happy to return to his school as an English and Mathematics teacher. Our family’s income improved because of my father’s promotion. My mother had two more sons—Gamini in 1952, and Parakrama in 1954.

In 1953, my father left Holy Cross College to join Aluthgama Maha Vidyalaya as its deputy head – another promotion. In 1955, at the age of 35, he joined St. Mary’s English College in Hambantota as its Principal. At that time, Hambantota was a small town known for its large salterns and beautiful beaches, about 140 miles southeast of Colombo.

In Hambantota, we lived in an old rented house with several large, poorly lit rooms. A large kohomba (margosa) tree spread its branches over the house, making the rooms darker. The garden was about one acre in size, with a few murunga trees and scrub. We had electricity for the first time in our lives but had to fetch water from a public tap about 50 yards from our home.

The toilet was a big hole in a concrete slab with a bucket under it and a toilet cleaner came early every morning. Across the road from us was the district Base Hospital. Next to the hospital were the church and the primary Sinhala school, and St Mary’s College was just behind the parish priest’s residence.

I joined the lower kindergarten class at the primary Sinhala school. On the first day at school, I cried saying that I did not want to leave my mother at home. Maria Gurunnanse, an old teacher who had taught my mother at Paiyagala many years ago was on the teaching staff. She shouted over the school wall, saying that my mother should be punished for keeping me at home. Then I apparently told her not to punish my mother, and that I would come to school every day without her.

There were about 12 students in my class, and we studied under a large kohomba tree for a few hours in the morning. My class teacher was Miss Seetha, who wore a blue saree every day. I noticed that she did not wear it the way my mother did. Mother draped her saree over her right shoulder, leaving a long trailing edge that touched the floor behind her. Miss Seetha wore hers over her left shoulder without a trailing edge.

Miss Seetha and my mother smelled alike because they used cuticira talcum powder. I wanted to stay close to Miss Seetha, sometimes thinking of her as my mother. Miss Seetha taught us how to count from 1 to 20. It was easy for me to study numbers, as I already knew how to count up to 50.

When the kindergarten class ended at 11.30, my mother was at the school gate to take me home. I told her about Miss Seetha while she fed me rice from her plate in the kitchen. That evening, I ran a mock class for our young house helper. I told her to repeat the numbers after me, and I had enough patience not to shout when she made a mistake. I tried to write a few numbers on my slate with my mother’s help before dinner.

The following day, when I went to school, Miss Seetha saw my slate and praised me for doing a lot of homework. She ticked the bottom of the slate with chalk to mark that I had got my numbers right. I kept that tick until I went home that afternoon. My mother told me that Miss Seetha was very impressed with my knowledge and homework. Proud of me, my mother told me to study as my father had done. I, too, was proud of myself and decided to count to 100 soon and read the books my father had in his study.

I was impatient to tell Miss Seetha that a few days later, I could count to 50. She kissed my forehead and stroked my head, saying, “You are a bright boy.”

After lunch, I usually sat with two of my brothers—Nihal and Gamini—on the bench under the kohomba tree to plan our afternoon. Nihal always wanted to be the captain of his ‘ship’, and Gamini and I were sailors or slaves. He took us to a place behind our house where there were three murunga trees. He set up a platform for us to sit on a tree and observe the imaginary sea that encircled us, looking for enemy vessels.

It was my duty to tell the captain about any suspicious movements at sea. If we shouted or wanted to go back to the house, the captain considered us mutineers and punished us with a cane. When he released us from our naval duties, Gamini and I played our own games. Our favorite was a ride in an improvised bus – an old wooden box placed on four empty milk powder. One of us pushed the box and the other ‘drove’. When the box fell off the tins, the pusher had to retrieve and replace them under the box.

One day I saw a nurse walking past our house. She smiled and waved at me and the next day I ran to the gate when I saw her coming from the hospital. She smiled, asked my name and introduced herself as Nilani Aunty. After that, on school days, Nilani Aunty stopped at our gate to chat with me.

She inquired about my studies, sports engagements, parents, and friends. Sometimes she brought me a few toffees or biscuits. She told me that she was a nurse at the hospital. I told her my mother was recently ill and had received some medicine from the hospital. She told me that my mother should tell her if she needed any help at the hospital.

I cannot remember Nilani Aunty’s face because I was too shy to look her in the eye. Still, I remember her as a tall and slim woman with light complexion. I liked her scent, which was reminiscent of my mother’s smell. Nilani wore a collared white blouse with black stripes, a white pinafore, white socks, black shoes and a white nurse cap.

After she left me at the gate, I felt lonely and wished she had stayed a little longer chatting with me. I remember the small handkerchief she carried in her hand and the lovely smell of ‘Cuticura’ talcum powder mixed into the scent of her sweat.

About three months later, I saw Nilani Aunty waiting for me at our gate. I came home late that day after playing cricket in the church compound. She was pleased to see me and used her handkerchief to wipe sweat from my face after wiping her own face. She wanted to know more about my studies and plans. I told her that I wanted to become a doctor. She smiled and said, “Then I will be your nurse. Study hard and become a good doctor.”

One day, she brought me a small paper bag of biscuits. She told me she might not see me again because she was going to a faraway place. She stroked my head, kissed my cheeks, and told me to be a good boy and study well. She wanted one day to hear about me and my achievements.

She had tears in her eyes. Perhaps that was the only time I saw her face. I asked her where she was going and how to talk to her. She did not answer. I told her I would be sad and miss her.

Then she left me and started walking away. I watched her slow movement. She walked without looking back. I remember watching her sorrowfully as she disappeared at the far end of the road. I had not told my mother about Nilani Aunty. But when grief overwhelmed me that evening, I told her about her gentleness and how sad I would be to miss her.

Mother consoled me, saying, “You have your amma who loves you.” I felt sad because I had tried to share my love for my mother with Nilani Aunty. I wondered whether it was possible to be so close to two people at once. I did not want to compare another woman with my mother or to love someone more than my mother.

But my sadness was unbearable when I thought about Nilani Aunty. My first loss. I wondered what would happen to me if my mother left me or died one day. My loneliness and sadness doubled. So I was determined to love only my mother as long as I lived. I have never met or heard from Nilani Aunty again. For several months, I had the urge to go to the gate and check whether she was back at the hospital.

First confession and first Holy Communion are two major milestones in a Catholic child’s spiritual growth. When I was six, I wanted to enroll in the parish priest’s catechism classes. By then, I was a junior altar server who assisted at the Eucharist on Sundays. The parish priest allowed me to attend catechism classes.

Lengthy catechism classes preceded first confession and communion. At the end of the period of preparation, I wanted to confess and receive holy communion. The priest told me to wait at least one more year before receiving the two sacraments because I was too young. I insisted that I should be allowed to take part in the two events. I thought I could become holy through confession and the Eucharist.

I blamed my mother for not supporting me. In the end, the priest reluctantly agreed to hear my confession and include me in the list of children eligible to receive Holy Communion. Each eligible boy and girl dressed in white as a bridegroom or bride for the occasion. I remember my father teasing me with his friends about my confessions. They wanted to know what sins I had committed as a young brat!

The celebrants’ parents hired an outdoor photographer to take group and individual photos of their children. Parents brought food, especially kiribath, hot tea, chocolate drinks, and cakes for the occasion. Two weeks later, the photographer informed the parents that, due to a technical fault all negatives were unprintable. I was upset but my father did not offer to take me to a studio to photograph me in my white suit.

Soon after my first Holy Communion, my father’s cousin, Uncle Julian, visited us in Hambantota. He wanted to learn how to fire a gun at a target. My father, Uncle Julian, and I went to a nearby saltern in front of the college grounds for shooting practice. I carried a tin full of number four cartridges and a large sheet of paper mounted on a light bamboo frame.

My father proudly carried his 12-bore Stevenson single-barreled gun and walked in front of us. Uncle Julian had an umbrella against the sun. He walked slowly because his bad knees were painful. While walking, he asked me how often I attend church services and catechism classes. I avoided his questions by joining my father.

I felt proud to walk with him carrying the cartridge tin. We saw lots of birds at the saltern. My father set up the bamboo frame with a sheet of white paper and drew several concentric circles on the paper. He mounted it on the frame and kept it against a bush. Uncle Julian stood about 50 meters from the frame and fired a few shots on my father’s instructions. After the third shot, he complained about the gun’s recoil. After each shot was fired, I ran to the frame and checked the paper. It indeed had several pellet marks.

Uncle Julian was delighted, and on our return, my father killed two ‘red legs’ birds for dinner. We walked silently for a short distance on an unpaved, narrow path. Uncle Julian stopped and asked my father, “You do not go to church on Sundays, do you?

Julian: “Why only occasionally? You set a bad example for your sons.” Father: “They are intelligent. They can decide later whether to go to church.” Julian: (with a sigh) “What is the purpose of doing well in life if you lose your soul?”

We continued walking silently. The sun was setting and it was a glorious sunset. Julian muttered to himself, “Every day, God gives us a clue to indicate we are his children. This beautiful sunset demonstrates it – only fools, especially those possessed by demons, cannot see it.” He wanted me to hear him, but I was not interested in sermons. I did not want to think about gods or my soul, but wanted to play with my dog, Blacky, and my three brothers.

That night, I could not sleep as I was tormented by the thought of ‘soul’. I thought God had punished me by making me sleepless for not believing in him. I was scared this punishment would continue day after day. The following morning, I asked my father, “Do I have a soul?” He hesitated for a few seconds and told me that he did not know.

I asked him, “Do you have a soul?” He said, “No.” He did not want to carry on the discussion. He said, “Do not worry about your soul. When you grow up, you will understand.” When he heard that I could not sleep, he blamed Uncle Julian for trying to inculcate guilt in my mind.

While thinking about my soul, it occurred to me that my sister died several years ago. I wanted to know what had happened to her soul. I knew her dead body was interred at a cemetery. I broached the subject with my father again during a weekend. He was willing to discuss the topic of the soul with me. He told me that, being Catholics, we were supposed to believe that each human being has an eternal soul given by God. He used to think that he had a soul, but after going through many difficulties throughout his life, he abandoned the idea of God and soul. My

After several minutes, he smiled and asked me, “Do you believe in God and the soul?” “Yes”, I said. “Why?” my father asked. “Because I am scared not to believe in God and the soul. God might punish me.”

I asked him, “What happened to my sister when she died? My father thought for a moment and said, “There is nothing to think about her as her death brought to a complete halt an incipient but lovely life. The question ‘what had happened to her’ is therefore meaningless. He continued, “But we have a lovely memory of her.” I thought my father had answered my question, but I still felt sad about my sister because I did not have a memory of her other than what Nihal had told me about her funeral.

Central bank gold holdings are at a 50year high. What’s behind the jump in reserves?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.