Siyapatha Finance concludes annual Sri Pada cleaning project

Siyapatha Finance PLC successfully concluded the 2026 Sri Pada Cleaning Project in conjunction with the company’s 21st anniversary and World Environment Day celebrations.

This year’s initiative adopted a combined approach consisting of both corrective and preventive measures, where nearly a tonne of polythene and plastic waste was collected within the span of one day, alongside raising public awareness and encouraging visitors to actively participate in the preservation of the holy ground through proper waste management practices.

The third largest peak wilderness sanctuary in Sri Lanka, Sri Pada is the natural habitat for approximately 8 percent of the country’s indigenous flora and fauna as well as a high concentration of endangered species. It accommodates three distinctive ecological zones – namely, Lowland Rainforest, Sub-montane Rainforest and Cloud Forest – based on the region’s varying high and low altitudes. The reserve also forms numerous headwaters in the territory, including for three major rivers in the country: Kelani, Kalu and Walawe.

Sri Pada was declared a Wildlife Nature Reserve in 1940 and a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2010 in recognition of its rich biodiversity, wilderness, historical significance and cultural value. One of the most revered, world-renowned pilgrimage sites in modern Sri Lanka, Sri Pada is visited by thousands of worshippers and sightseers from across the globe. Unfortunately, this growing footfall every year has led to the gradual pollution and destruction of the holy site, in turn posing a major threat to its unique ecosystem.

Under the guidance of Sri Pada Chief Incumbent Most Venerable Bengamuwe Dhammadinna Thera and with permission and utmost support of the Maskeliya Pradeshiya Sabha Chairman, Wildlife Conservation Department and Nallathanniya Police, over 50 staff members of Siyapatha Finance, headed by CEO Mathisha Hewavitharana and the senior management, forged ahead with this year’s collaborative effort to protect the sacred site.

Hewavitharana remarked, “Recognising that long-term corporate success is inherently entwined with environmental prosperity and sustenance was a massive eye-opener in the formative days of Siyapatha’s journey, to have a deeper understanding of our mission as a business entity. Through the years, we’ve witnessed firsthand how our projects bring out the power of people through collaboration and cooperation – the impact of even a single, thoughtful initiative on the betterment of this country’s well-being and progress. I am deeply thankful for everyone who has rendered their time, energy and support to bring this year’s project to fruition.”

Launched in 2024 under ‘Siyapathen Mihikathata Green Initiative’, Siyapatha Finance’s corporate social responsibility strategy centred on environmental conservation and preservation. The Sri Pada Cleaning Project is recognised as a momentous annual event in the company’s corporate calendar, uniting communities in protecting the island nation’s history, heritage and environment.