The voice behind ‘Kandy Lamissi’ is no more

Yes, Sri Lanka has lost one of its most beloved voices. Mariazelle Goonetilleke, of ‘Kandy Lamissi’ fame, is no more.

She passed away last Friday morning (10th July), aged 68, and, undoubtedly, her enormous hit ‘Kandy Lamissi’ will forever keep her memory alive.

Mariazelle Goonetilleke was born on 11 June in Nugegoda, and began singing at age seven. At 10, she won the junior section at an All Island Talent Competition. That win led her to join the popular pre-teen group Junior Rhythmiers.

This talented artiste later played guitar, organ and sang with bands like The Emeralds and Midnight Mist. She also studied classical guitar, under Winston Jayawardene, and vocals under Estelle de Niese.

The song was based on verses by Asith Kitto Chandrasena, of the Blue Sapphires, which Mariazelle adapted and added to.

Released on a popular recording label, in Sri Lanka, ‘Kandy Lamissi’ became an instant hit and she came to be known by that name. The bilingual baila is still sung at weddings and social events today.

Mariazelle had a versatile career spanning pop, baila and Sri Lankan music.

Her other popular songs include ‘Sihina Nelum Mal,’ (a tribute to her son Teshan), ‘Gayu Gee,’ ‘Yowun Sihina Loke,’ ‘Wathsala,’ ‘Aluth Iskole’, and ‘Nadunana Adarya’.

In 2025, she released a song, about childhood memories, titled ‘Ape Dadda.’

She worked with legends like Clarence Wijewardene, M.S. Fernando, Stanley Peiris and the Gypsies.

Mariazelle was active from the 1960s right up to 2026. She was known for her versatility, faith, and resilience – even after a serious accident she continued performing.

Mariazelle Goonetilleke truly was a legend. Yes, a true icon of our music scene.

‘Kandy Lamissi’ is part of all our childhoods … and we’ll hear that song and remember her for generations.

Spectre of the “deep state”: Planned capture of the Judiciary by the Executive

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.