U.S. issues damning report on investment climate in Sri Lanka

Colombo, Oct. 1 (Daily Mirror) - In what appeared to be a damning report , the U.S. Department of State, in its latest report, says the country’s investment climate remains challenging despite recovery from the 2022 economic crisis with a five percent growth last year exceeding expectations.

The report’ 2026 Investment Climate: Sri Lanka’ , the Department says the sweeping electoral victories of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and his National People’s Power (NPP) parliamentary coalition in late 2024 had provided political stability.

However, it says the NPP’s commitment to the country’s $3 billion, four-year (2023-2027) Extended Fund Facility IMF programme reassured investors, but many remain wary given the NPP leadership’s mixed messages on the openness of the country’s market.

The U.S. embassy in Colombo shared the online version of the report with the Sri Lankan media.

Foreign direct investment (FDI) in 2025 was $1.06 billion, approximately 1 percent of GDP, significantly below the three to four percent commonly seen in emerging economies. The sectors that attracted the most foreign investment in 2025 were: manufacturing, port development, tourism, information technology and business process outsourcing and real estate.

According to the report , investment experts cite the following areas as requiring greater focus and improvement on areas such as policy stability, regulatory reform, availability of skilled labor, access to industrial land, efficient logistics and streamlined trade procedures to meet the FDI targets set by the government.

Investors view access to preferential export markets through FTAs as an important factor in investment decisions, as such agreements improve export competitiveness and reduce the cost of imported raw materials and intermediate goods, the report says.

The report highlights that U.S. firms continue to explore opportunities in sectors such as information and communications technology (ICT), energy, aviation and defense

However, regulatory unpredictability, bureaucratic hurdles, and selective transparency continue to limit broader participation, it says.

The government’s institutional capacity to encourage an open investment environment remains limited despite positive rhetoric. Overall, investors report that doing business remains difficult, frequently citing concerns about project reversals, regulatory shifts, slow decision making and inadequate support for established businesses.

The IMF and local business chambers stress the need for comprehensive structural reforms, including trade facilitation, digitization, and stronger governance mechanisms.

These country reports are published by the respective U.S. embassies across the world covering over 170 countries.

Asserting that Sri Lanka’s implementation of foreign investment policies is inconsistent, the report says the Board of Investment (BOI) , as the principal investment promotion agency, struggles to function as a “one-stop shop” due to fragmented authority across multiple government departments, creating lengthy approval processes that frustrate potential investors.

Investors report challenges in having a consistent and open dialogue with the BOI. In May 2026, the BOI launched the Ready to invest digital platform with sector-specific investment opportunities. Key impediments include unnecessary regulations, legal uncertainty, and poor bureaucratic responsiveness. Inefficient state-owned energy enterprises, notably the Ceylon Electricity Board, hinder development of cost-effective energy supplies crucial for industrial operations. Foreign investors consistently report high transaction costs, unpredictable policies, and opaque procurement procedures, according to the report.

The State Department, in its report, says the NPP government publicly promotes a desire for inward investment, and Sri Lanka permits 100 percent foreign ownership across most economic sectors, with constitutional guarantees for investment protection and unrestricted repatriation of earnings, fees, and capital.

The report has cited the non-implementation of US $ 3.7 billion Sinopec investment committed by the President in January, 2025 and withdrawal from the US $ 400 wind farm project by the Adani group as examples.

“January 2025, President Dissanayake committed to finalizing a $3.7 billion Sinopec oil refinery project, the largest FDI project in Sri Lankan history, to be located adjacent to Chinese-controlled Hambantota International Port. As of June 2026, the project remains pending due to disagreements between the government and Sinopec. In February 2025, Indian firm Adani Green Energy withdrew from a proposed $400 million, 484 MW wind farm project in northern Sri Lanka, citing Sri Lankan government efforts to renegotiate a previously awarded contract. In December 2025 the government quietly ended negotiations with China Harbour Engineering Company on a new floating LNG terminal just days before the contract was to be signed. The NPP government also ceased the planned privatization of many SOEs, choosing to implement turnaround reforms instead. Some investors report concerns regarding mixed public messaging. While the government has sought to attract foreign investment, certain senior officials have publicly advocated a larger role for state-owned enterprises and state participation in economic activity,” the report says.