Lanka IOC donates wheelchairs to Colombo South Teaching Hospital

Lanka IOC PLC, in commemoration of its 24th anniversary, donated 20 wheelchairs to the Colombo South Teaching Hospital – Kalubowila, reaffirming its continued commitment to supporting Sri Lanka’s public healthcare sector.

Colombo South Teaching Hospital Deputy Director Dr. B. Sai Niranjan said Lanka IOC has been a long-standing partner of the hospital and had extended vital assistance during the COVID-19 pandemic. At a time when the hospital faced a shortage of essential medicines, Lanka IOC provided urgently required medicines valued at Rs.2 million. The company also donated two dialysis machines to the hospital during the crisis period.

Lanka IOC Managing Director K. Raghu said, “Our mandate is to find meaningful ways of serving the nation. Through our WE CARE programme, we remain committed to supporting communities and addressing their essential social needs.”

He noted that healthcare remained a key focus of Lanka IOC’s CSR initiatives. Having identified the shortage of dialysis facilities in government hospitals, the company has so far donated 34 dialysis machines to government hospitals across Sri Lanka, particularly supporting the hospitals with limited facilities.

Raghu also highlighted the recently conducted other initiatives, including the donation of an NIV machine National Hospital Galle, smart glasses to visually impaired students at the University of Colombo and initiatives to provide clean water to institutions, including religious places.

“I know that the government hospitals can never be facilitated in full. However, wherever there is a genuine requirement, we will continue to do our best to fulfil it. It is our mandate to stand with the community and stand with the nation,” he said.

The event was attended by Lanka IOC Managing Director K. Raghu, Senior Vice President Retail Sales and HR Jitendra Sharma, Senior Vice President Engineering and Administration Sandeep Gupta, Colombo South Teaching Hospital Director Dr. Lalith Poddalgoda, Deputy Director Dr. B. Sai Niranjan, hospital staff and the members of the Lanka IOC CSR team.

The wheelchair donation forms part of Lanka IOC’s 24th anniversary celebrations and reflects the company’s continued commitment to supporting public healthcare and contributing to the well-being of communities across Sri Lanka.