90th Anniversary of LSSP and leftism in Sri Lanka

The Lanka Sama Samaja Party was formed on the 18th of December 1935. Its four leaders were Dr. N. M, Perera, Dr. Coivin R, de Silva, Philip Gunewardena and Leslie Goonewardene, who also became the General Secretary. (Prior to this, in 1933, the Wellawatte Mills strike first led to their getting together in action). It must be mentioned that The LSSP was the first properly constituted political party in the country. It was also the first genuine Left party and its political philosophy was based on Marxism-Leninism. It took the name ” Sama Samaja”, which means ” Equal Society”, as, at that time, the people in Sri Lanka were unfamiliar with the terms Socialism and Communism. It was quickly accepted by the people and, despite the use of state power and thuggery against the LSSP by the local capitalist class, backed by the British rulers, the Party rapidly gained popularity among the people. In the General Election of March 1936 Dr. N. M. Perera was elected to represent the Ruwanwella electorate and Philip Gunawardena the Avissawella electorate. Unfortunately, Dr. S. A. Wickramasinghe was unable to retain Akuressa, which he had won in the 1931 Election, and Leslie Goonewardene failed to win Panadura due to the use of caste and money unfairly against him. Leslie, throughout his political career, refrained from descending to such a low level of politics But the LSSP stand helped in the process of uniting and politicisation of the people which was necessary to generate the confidence of the people in their ability to win Complete Independence through the democratic process.

Throughout its history a major role in the success of the LSSP was its provision of support to the struggles of the working class to win its rights. Dr. N. M. Perera formed the Ceylon Federation of Labour and, as its President, he organised the trade union movement to focus on winning their genuine demands as a class.  He negotiated with the employers and won many demands across the table, and resorted to strike action as a last resort. He won the respect of both employees and employers as a leader who did not misuse the trade unions for personal vendettas. He used Parliament in a responsible manner to fight on behalf of the workers, while informing the public who suffered as a result of the strikes that the demands were just, and winning their support as well. The LSSP unions have maintained these values and continue to serve the working class

The LSSP was aware of the problem of poverty leading to hunger as a major factor that affected the life of a majority of our people. A survey done at the MRI, about two years ago, showed that 63% of families had an income below the poverty line. They could not have three adequate meals per day. Some had two meals and others only one that met their nutritional needs. The children and mothers were particularly vulnerable. The malnutrition level in that study was 14.3%. But the situation appears to be worse now. The Suriyamal Movement led NM to one of the worst affected areas, Kegalle. The focus was on malaria eradication, but they had to also address the problem of poverty and hunger. Rice, dhal and coconut sambol were provided. NM came to be known as “Parippu Mahaththaya” as a result. The LSSP is reviving the Suriyamal Movement which has become an urgent need after the Climate Change. Any help will be welcome.

We celebrate Independence Day alone, but India also celebrates Republic Day. It is the latter that gave India sovereignty, without which independence is empty. They won it within three years, with Ambedkar drafting the Republican Constitution. The LSSP kept on pressing for it but the comprador capitalist class, led by the UNP, kept delaying as they were happy with Dominion status. The LSSP joined the SLFP and CP to form the coalition government, led by Sirimavo Bandaranaike, in 1970, and Dr. Colvin R. de Silva was made the Minister of Constitutional Affairs. He finally drafted the Republican Constitution in 1972. Sri Lanka took 24 years to do this and we can hold our heads up as we are now politically a truly independent sovereign nation. But we remain a poor underdeveloped country with widespread unemployment and underemployment, especially among the youth. The number of those in poverty is rising while the rich are becoming super rich. The rich/poor gap is widening and it may explode. It is sad to see that Sri Lanka is far away from the Welfare State that the LSSP, led by Dr. Perera, strove to build. As Minister of Finance, he kept the cost of living down, balanced the Budget and did not tax the poor. He had a high direct tax on those who could afford to pay this. Unlike now, the priority was given to use the limited forex to buy essential medicines,not luxury vehicles.

As Minister of Science and Technology, I started the Vidatha Movement to provide the technology and finance for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) countrywide, one centre headed by a science graduate in each division. I am told that more than 50,000 entrepreneurs have emerged marketing their products sustainably. More than one thousand are exporting their products. I appeal to the NPP government to continue to support them. We must develop into an industrial nation if we are to emerge from poverty. I and the LSSP will give all support. By the way, our armed forces can defend our country. We do not need American forces.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.