HNB-Nucleus Software celebrate 5 years of partnership

From left: Nucleus Software COO and Country Head Singapore Anurag Mantri, HNB EVP and Head of SME and Micro Finance Rajive Dissanayake, Nucleus Software co-founder and Managing Director Vishnu R. Dusad, HNB MD and CEO Damith Pallewatte, HNB COO Sanjay Wijemanne, Nucleus Software CBO Dr. Apurva Chamaria and HNB Chief Innovation Officer Chandima Cooray

Hatton National Bank PLC (HNB) and Nucleus Software, a global provider of lending and transaction banking solutions, celebrated five years of partnership at a gala evening held at ITC Ratnadipa, Colombo.

The milestone marks five years since HNB selected FinnAxia, Nucleus Software’s flagship transaction banking platform, to modernise its corporate banking ecosystem and support the bank’s long-term digital transformation vision.

Since the partnership commenced in 2021, FinnAxia has played a pivotal role in strengthening HNB’s transaction banking capabilities, enabling a seamless digital experience across vendor payments, payroll processing, bill payments, receivables, API banking, host-to-host connectivity and cross-border transactions.

All backed by strong MIS and customer relationship view on various fronts including CASA statements, loan details, term deposits to name a few. More importantly, it has helped HNB build the agility required to respond to the evolving customer expectations, accelerate service delivery and scale its transaction banking business in an increasingly digital-first environment.

Every single day, an average of over 3000 users leave their digital footprint on FinnAxia, a powerful testament to its adoption, reliability and value.

The platform enables straight-through processing across LankaPay payment rails, including CEFT, SLIPS and RTGS and facilitates LPOPP electronic bill payments for ASYCUDA, EPF and SLPA.

With the launch of ETF, HNB and its valued corporate customers are now benefitting from a comprehensive suite of transaction banking offerings under a single platform, providing greater convenience, flexibility and an enhanced banking experience.

HNB Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer Damith Pallewatte said, “Over the past five years, our partnership with Nucleus Software has helped strengthen HNB’s position as a leader in transaction banking in Sri Lanka. FinnAxia has enabled us to deliver a modern, digital-first experience for our corporate customers while enhancing operational agility, supporting growth and driving innovation. As customer expectations continue to evolve, we remain committed to investing in capabilities that create long-term value for our clients and the wider economy.”

Nucleus Software Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director Parag Bhise said, “We are proud to celebrate this milestone with HNB. The success of this partnership reflects a shared vision, strong execution and a commitment to delivering meaningful outcomes for customers. Over the past five years, HNB has demonstrated how the right combination of technology, leadership and agility can transform transaction banking. We look forward to continuing this journey and helping HNB unlock new opportunities for growth, innovation and customer excellence.”

The implementation was recognised with the Silver award for Best Managed Project at Project Management Excellence Awards 2023, reflecting the scale, complexity and impact of the transformation.

The celebration brought together the leaders from both organisations to reflect on a partnership built on trust, collaboration and a shared commitment to innovation. As HNB and Nucleus Software mark this important milestone, both organisations reaffirm their commitment to driving the next phase of transaction banking transformation-one that is defined by agility, customer-centricity, operational excellence and sustainable growth.