‘Trailblazing moment’ for New Zealand-SL bilateral economic ties

The landmark announcement of JAT Holdings’ acquisition of Mirotone (NZ) Ltd, New Zealand’s No. 1 industrial wood-coatings company, took place on Nov. 4th at ITC Ratnadipa, drawing leading diplomats, business leaders and industry stakeholders. The event was seen as a “trailblazing moment” for New Zealand- Sri Lanka bilateral economic ties by New Zealand’s High Commissioner to Sri Lanka David Pine.

New Zealand’s High Commissioner Pine, delivering the keynote remarks, went on to describe the acquisition as “a powerful example of responsible foreign investment; strengthening a proud New Zealand brand.”

“What we really want to see a lot more of in New Zealand—just like every other country—is high-quality foreign investment, Pine said. “And just as important is ensuring companies that have done well for decades find responsible new owners, especially after challenging periods.”

He said the acquisition was “preserving and strengthening a New Zealand company that deserved a secure future” and added:

“This is the most significant investment to date by a Sri Lankan company in New Zealand. I hope we will look back on this night—and on you, Aelian, and your team—as trailblazers.”

Aelian Gunawardene, Founder and Managing Director of JAT Holdings, said that throughout his travels across Asia and Australia, one brand consistently stood out—Mirotone, seen as a respected and dominant name in Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia, Singapore and beyond.

“For nine decades, this company led the wood-coating industry in the Asia-Pacific region, he said. “It was a brand I admired, benchmarked and looked up to. Today, to be its custodian feels almost unreal.”

He recalled the intense negotiations—early morning calls, late-night meetings, and the JAT board’s approval of a USD 3 billion allocation to acquire a top-tier international coatings brand.

“This isn’t just about growth, Gunawardene added. “It’s about joining hands with a 90-year-old legacy of craftsmanship and innovation.”

He expressed gratitude to the original founders and said JAT looked forward to celebrating the brand’s 100th anniversary in 2035.

JAT Holdings CEO Nishal Ferdinando walked stakeholders through the strategic transformation the acquisition will unlock over the next 24–30 months.

He emphasised JAT’s groundbreaking R&D capabilities, including South Asia’s first water-based wood-coating binder, developed by only four companies globally.

AMW strengthens Southern presence with the opening of a new showroom in Matara

Sampath Bank and Ideal Motors partner to drive affordable vehicle ownership in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.