Keells marks 35 years of keeping life fresh for Sri Lanka

For Keells, freshness has always meant more than what reaches a supermarket shelf. It represents a commitment built over 35 years to improving everyday experiences, strengthening communities and creating opportunities for the people connected to its journey.

As Keells surpasses its 150th outlet milestone, reflecting on a journey where freshness has always been more than what reaches the shelf; it is reflected in the way Keells supports people, strengthens communities and creates better everyday experiences. From empowering farmers and employees to connecting families with fresh choices, Keells has continued to bring this belief to life through freshness, convenience, trust and care, improving the quality of life for the nation. It is not a new promise, but an outlook that has guided Keells from the very beginning.

Since opening its first store at Liberty Plaza, Colombo in 1991, Keells has evolved alongside changing consumer needs, moving beyond traditional retail to create a connected ecosystem that supports customers, farmers, suppliers, employees, and communities. Today, with 150 stores across Sri Lanka, the brand continues to build on its purpose of improving the quality of life for the nation.w

For customers, this journey is reflected in the everyday choices and experiences Keells continues to create. From farm-fresh produce and prepared food offerings to an expanding range of products, new food experiences and digital innovations such as the Keells Nexus App, the brand continues to evolve around the changing needs of Sri Lankan households. The Nexus ecosystem now connects with 2.9 million members, offering a more personalised and accessible omnichannel experience through relevant promotions, personalised offers and exclusive rewards.

Beyond sourcing fresh produce, Keells continues to invest in strengthening the farming ecosystem. Over 2,000 farmers, including female agripreneurs have been trained in financial literacy, climate-resilient agriculture, organic farming and sustainable cultivation, while model farms and new agricultural technologies support farmers in improving productivity and reducing losses.

At the heart of Keells’ freshness journey are the farmers who make it possible. Working with over 4,000 active farmers across 10 collection centres, Keells has built a direct sourcing network that connects agricultural communities with consumers across the country. Through initiatives such as Govi Diriya, farmers receive support in climate-resilient agriculture, sustainable cultivation and Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) certification, along with awareness and precautionary measures to prepare for challenges such as El Niño.

With over 6,500 employees, the organisation continues to create opportunities through training, career development and wellbeing initiatives. Through partnerships such as NAITA certification, Keells supports employees in building recognised skills and progressing in their careers. This is complemented by initiatives that support employees through different stages of their lives, including leadership development and career growth for women through She Rises, access to mental and social wellbeing support through Peace Pod, and practical guidance on managing personal finances through the Financial Wellbeing Program.

The commitment extends beyond stores into the wider communities Keells serves. Through initiatives such as pre-school meal programs, food redistribution efforts and youth development programs, Keells continues to create shared value. The pre-school meal initiative has provided over 538,000 meals to more than 4,500 children across 116 pre-schools, while the Skill Into Progress (SKIP) program, organised by the John Keells Foundation and The Rainbow Institute, Keells has supported 1,322 students across 10 locations islandwide, with 280 graduates earning certification, with further rollouts on the horizon.

As Keells looks towards the future, it continues to build on an outlook shaped by years of supporting people, strengthening communities and creating better everyday experiences. Now, Keells hopes to inspire Sri Lankans to find freshness in the little things they do, discover new possibilities and make everyday life a little better.

Because keeping life fresh is not only about what we bring home. It is about the opportunities we create, the communities we strengthen, the better tomorrow we help build together, and how we inspire everyone to live in a fresh way.