A tribute to Baba: On what would have been his 78th birthday - 21 March 2026

Anthony A. Page, affectionately known to all as “Baba” was not just a family man, he helped build an enterprise. As the youngest of eight children, I had the unique privilege of seeing him play two roles: he was my elder brother, but in many ways, he was also a second father. He shaped my life not just growing up as a kid but as an adult always checking up on me and making sure I was on the right path.

Baba joined Ceylon Theatres in 1971, where he became a fierce advocate for the liberalisation of the Sri Lankan film industry. His visionary leadership was the cornerstone of what we now know as CT Holdings, Cargills, and CT Land. Even at the time of his accident, he was actively involved in several boards as the Chairman of CT Holdings and as a Director on the Boards of the Lanka Ceramics Group.

To this day, employees throughout the group speak of his legendary attention to detail. He didn't just manage; he transformed, introducing the systems and structures that remain the backbone of the CT Holdings Group today.

When CT Smith was formed in 1992, Baba was my guide and the architect of its foundation. But his influence stretched far beyond the Boardroom. Even now, when I encounter his old friends and colleagues, they often look at me and say, "You look so much like Baba." They usually follow it with a smile and a wish: "I hope you have his heart, too.” To this day if anyone talks about him it is always with so much fondness as they recall all the happy memories they had with him.

That was the essence of Baba —he possessed a heart as large as his professional ambitions.

It has been 19 months since his passing and 13 years since his fall, yet Baba’s presence hasn't faded. His legacy is etched in the lives he shaped.

I feel Baba’s legacy in everything he touched.  He shaped not only his immediate family, but he had profound influence on the direction of all the lives he touched.  The young kids he patiently coached in math, the young adults he mentored, some of them becoming successful business leaders in their own right.  I’m sure his children, nephews and nieces and their children will continue that legacy of always aiming to do the right thing not only for their own family but for the greater good of the entire community.

Baba, your life was a masterclass in leadership and love. We miss you, but we see you everywhere.