Credit expansion gathers pace, CB Governor says, ‘No Overheating’

Sri Lanka’s private sector credit is expanding, but Central Bank Governor Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe firmly dismissed concerns that the growth could be overheating, stating, “No, not at all.”

Speaking at the press briefing for the 2025 Financial Stability Review (FSR), the Governor directly addressed a key warning in the report. The FSR, which confirmed improved financial sector resilience, also noted that a ‘widening private sector Credit-to-GDP Gap’ suggests a need for continuous monitoring of any build-up of systemic risk.

When questioned by a journalist on this potential risk, Dr. Weerasinghe provided a detailed context, arguing that the headline figure, when analysed, is not a cause for alarm.

He explained that other key indicators remain subdued. ‘Financial intermediation is still well below the level we had earlier,’ the Governor said, adding that “private sector credit as a share of GDP is still below pre-pandemic levels.”

Confidently, the Governor characterised the trend as a healthy and necessary rebalancing rather than a dangerous boom. He pointed out that as public sector credit is coming down, more private sector credit can be accommodated in the system.

“When you take overall credit expansion, what we see is more of a shift of public sector credit to the private,” Dr. Weerasinghe stated. “The other factor is that economic recovery means private sector credit also needs to grow in line with the recovery that we see… That is why we think it is not a major concern.”

The FSR itself provides insight into where this growth is concentrated. The report noted a particularly strong credit expansion within the Finance Companies (FCs) sector. This surge, it said, was largely driven by an increase in vehicle and gold-backed facilities, following the recent removal of vehicle import restrictions and the prevalence of lower market interest rates.

Overall, the FSR concluded that the financial sector’s resilience improved in the first half of 2025. This was supported by better profitability in both banks and FCs, driven by higher net interest income.

However, the report also urged vigilance in several areas. It pointed out that while declining, the banking sector’s Stage 3 Loans ratio (an indicator similar to Non-Performing Loans) remained elevated.

Furthermore, the FSR noted that the spread between lending and deposit rates also remained elevated compared to its pre-crisis average, highlighting an area for further improvement.

Looking ahead, the Central Bank expects the momentum in the macroeconomic recovery to continue supporting financial stability. However, it warned of downside risks, particularly from global uncertainties to which the country is susceptible.

SriLankan Airlines’ overall loss masks 64% cut in core operational deficit

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.