A neighbour in need, a friend indeed

India’s support to Sri Lanka continues under operation Sagar Bandhu

India continues to expand its humanitarian assistance to Sri Lanka under Operation Sagar Bandhu, with extensive air, sea, and ground operations delivering urgent relief to communities affected by Cyclone Ditwah.

The relief consignment brought to Trincomalee on 1 December 2025 by INS Sukanya of the Indian Navy was swiftly transported by the Sri Lankan Air Force to several severely impacted areas across the Eastern Province, ensuring that essential supplies reached families isolated by flooding and landslides.

Indian rescue teams continued large-scale life-saving evacuations across multiple districts, bringing vulnerable residents from remote and inaccessible areas to safety. In Puttalam, NDRF personnel rescued individuals in distress including expectant mothers, those requiring immediate medical attention and delivered essential supplies to nearly 800 stranded people through difficult, door-to-door operations. Across the central region, Indian Air Force helicopters carried out critical missions, air-dropping more than 5.5 tonnes of relief material and conducting high-risk extractions from locations where landing was impossible. Several severely injured survivors were winched up from a remote area near Ganthuna and flown to Rivisanda for emergency treatment.

In close coordination with Sri Lankan Air Force, the IAF IFC 1885 flew essential relief to Poramadulla and transported personnel from Nuwara Eliya to support ongoing response efforts. The IAF IFC 1875 helicopter further intensified these operations by airlifting more than 2,000 kilograms of essential goods to Mandaram Nuwara and evacuating people in urgent need of medical care. In Kotmale, twenty-four individuals including women and children were safely rescued and transported to Colombo. On Tuesday (02), IAF helicopters airlifted more than eight tonnes of relief material, and evacuated 65 stranded persons including children, pregnant women and those critically ill. Citizens of Germany and Australia were among those evacuated. These sustained and coordinated missions ensured that those most at risk were relocated swiftly to secure locations and hospitals.

High Commissioner of India to Sri Lanka Santosh Jha visited Sedawatta near Colombo on Tuesday to review ongoing NDRF rescue operations. The High Commissioner also interacted with affected residents and local authorities coordinating the ground response. At this site, NDRF teams are conducting meticulous door-to-door evacuations and distributing essential relief in heavily inundated areas around Nadeegama on the banks of the Kelani River, where floodwaters have risen up to six to eight feet. 52 persons were evacuated. NDRF team in Badulla continues search operations in landfall areas. One body was recovered after complex excavation operations.

In a major reinforcement of medical assistance, IAF C17 Globemaster aircraft brought in, a rapidly deployable, modular, field hospital, complete with ambulances, trauma care units, operation theatres etc. to Sri Lanka on 2 December, along with 73 medical personnel. The field hospital was handed over to the Sri Lankan side by High Commissioner Santosh Jha. The field hospital will be deployed to cater to urgent medical requirements in flood-hit and landslide hit areas.

India said it remains steadfast in its support for the people of Sri Lanka during this challenging time. Under Operation Sagar Bandhu, relief efforts continue around the clock-on the ground, at sea, and in the skies-ensuring that help reaches where it is needed most.