Egypt want officials kicked out of World Cup

July.08 - The Egyptian Football Association says it has asked Fifa to kick the officials in charge of their World Cup last-16 defeat by Argentina out of the tournament.

The EFA said it had lodged a complaint with football's world governing body and wants an investigation into "double standards" of officiating in the game in Atlanta.

With Egypt leading 1-0 in the second half, the video assistant referee (VAR) ruled out a goal by Mostafa Zico after Egypt midfielder Marwan Attia was penalised for stepping on Lisandro Martinez's foot at the start of the move.

Egypt also thought Mohamed Salah was fouled in the Argentina penalty area, seconds before the reigning champions broke for the stoppage-time winner in a 3-2 victory.

An EFA statement read: "Hany Abou Rida, president of the Egyptian football federation, filed a complaint with Fifa, demanding an investigation into the French referee Francois Letexier after the serious refereeing mistakes committed by the team of referees and double standards, which caused the Egypt team to lose the match and leave the World Cup."

The EFA has called for an investigation of the team of referees and video technology referees after what it said were "blatant errors and insisting on not reviewing some of the footage".

It "demanded the exclusion of the referee and the entire crew from the World Cup after investigating these mistakes" and alleged "the crime of discrimination against the Egyptian national team".

Egypt have never reached the quarter-finals of the World Cup.

Argentina captain Lionel Messi, who could be playing in his final World Cup, set up their first goal in the 79th minute and scored an 83rd-minute equaliser.

After the game manager Hossam Hassan said Egypt had been "treated unfairly" and "suffered injustice".

"Perhaps they wanted to keep the world champion in the competition. Perhaps they wanted Messi to stay in the running," he said.

Zico said: "The referee was really unfair. The injustice was clear. There's been an unfairness right from the start of the match.

Argentina play Switzerland in Kansas City on Saturday (02:00 BST, Sunday). - BBC