One Term President Sirisena and post-election maneuvers

“I learn about events in the country only from newspapers”— President Maithripala Sirisena

Maithripala Sirisena was not at all sure of a victory in the 2015 Presidential election. Knowing full well the treatment meted out to Sarath Fonseka, MR’s rival in 2010, he had planned to spend the night of the vote count in a friend’s estate in Kurunegala. In fact he need not have worried because he not only obtained a plurality of votes but also went over the 50 percent barrier in the first count. In this he fared better than MR who on his first attempt barely scraped through.

When there were unexplained gaps in announcing the results electorate -wise, I suspected that the well laid plans of MR were going awry. Late that night Sirisena was informed by Ranil that he was the winner and that he should come post-haste to Colombo. In the meantime, Ranil was asked to hold the fort and negotiate the departure of MR from Temple Trees as early as possible.

But it seemed that an attempt was in the offing to prevent MR from vacating office on the grounds that he had time remaining from his tenure as the President who was elected in 2010 for a six year term. There was speculation among the top social circles of Colombo that the Army Commander and IGP had been summoned to Temple Trees to ascertain whether the security forces would go along with such an extension.

The Chief Justice Mohan Peiris went to Temple Trees having been summoned apparently to give an opinion regarding the legality of the move that was being contemplated. It was said that both the Army Commander and the IGP refused to be a party to an enterprise which would amount to a “coup d’etat”. There was no indication as to the advice rendered by the CJ, except that he was to soon lose his position. No doubt it was highly improper to even solicit such an opinion from the CJ, as he was not the legal officer of the government. An incumbent President could have sought the opinion of the Attorney General, but not of the CJ who certainly did not have such advisory powers.

The upshot of this alleged irregular attempt by MR was that the Security Chiefs were unanimously opposed to any such thing. MR then gave in with grace and quit Temple Trees and availed himself of the offer by Ranil that he could be airlifted to his home in Tangalle. He left amidst the tears of his staff who had thronged the entrance to TT that morning. Once he got home MR gave an impromptu speech blaming the minorities for his defeat.

In spite of his downfall, MR’s supporters from all over the country came to his home to console him. His house in Tangalle became a pilgrimage centre with party loyalists and sympathizers coming in droves for “darshan” of their erstwhile leader. The few SLFP leaders who remained with him began to dream of a Rajapaksa restoration and MR resumed his usual baby kissing and temple visits which he had used to good effect early in his quest for high office.

Though Maithripala [MS] won a victory in the face of great odds he did not command a majority of MP’s in Parliament. The new government had only 60 seats in a Parliament of 225. The UNP which was the main opposition, and the motor of his victory, did not have the numbers to challenge the MR led SLFP. Thus MS’s first move was to pull out some SLFP members to his side to bolster his own position, vis a vis the UNP as well as to ensure the safety of his government.

To this end he began negotiations with a clique of SLFPers who backed him when he was the General Secretary of the party. Many of them had personal grievances such as being sidelined in the party by MR or being appointed “Senior Ministers” without Ministries and Departments under them. As predicted by MR very early his chickens [senior ministers] were now coming home to roost.

This pro-MS group of SLFPers were led by Mahinda Amaraweera from Hambantota, who was constantly claiming that his life was in danger from the Rajapaksas, and Janaka Bandara Tennakoon, son of a SLFP stalwart who had been given high office by the Bandaranaikes. Perhaps at their urging MS called me at home and requested me to help him and added that in the event of his not getting the requested support from the SLFP he would dissolve Parliament.

This would lead to the decimation of the SLFP and the emergence of the UNP as the winner of such an election. He also told me that MR had been persuaded to give up the leadership of the SLFP which under the SLFP constitution would accrue to the party person who holds the office of President of the country. Since MS had not been legally expelled from the SLFP he was entitled to benefit from that constitutional provision.

Though there could be flaws in this interpretation no one was going to question it and MR said he was willing to hand over the office of party president. This was the conclusion arrived at a meeting held by the two factions at the Speaker’s residence. Since Chamal Rajapaksa was still the Speaker both factions could avail themselves of this facility. I agreed to MS’s request and our group of SLFPers first met at Janaka Tennakoon’s official residence and then moved onto Amaraweera’s house since it was in close proximity to MS’s official residence in Paget Road.

We could walk across to MS’s house or he could come “incognito” to Amaraweeras to meet us. There were about 30 SLFP MPs who met that evening at Amaraweera’s and agreed to support the MS regime under the SLFP banner. At this stage our group was strong as MR and his relatives were in no position to bargain, having lost the election. However it was much later that we heard that Amaraweera had taken Namal to meet MS that night to smoke a peace pipe.

At a later TV debate they argued about this clandestine visit. While Amaraweera stated that Namal had begged for mercy, Namal replied that the meeting was to suggest to him that his father should quit politics and retire. We can now speculate that it was this “stab in the back” that alienated Ranil from MS at the beginning of the new administration.

CBK always maintained that it was MS and not Ranil who had first betrayed the trust of the voters by playing up to the Rajapaksas within a few days of winning the Presidential election. When well known corrupt offenders of the SLFP were to be prosecuted, MS was pressurized by his SLFP loyalists to intervene and stop further action.

Another influence on us at that time was Maduluwawe Sobitha Thero who was keen to incorporate a faction of the SLFP in the government that he did so much to create. He was not an admirer of Ranil. His favourite was Karu Jayasuriya who too had ambitions of holding high office. Sobhita backer and financial manager was my friend Cornel Perera who brought several messages from the priest that I should support MS at this juncture.

However, unfortunately Sobhita fell seriously ill and had to be admitted to hospital with heart disease. Later he was airlifted to Singapore but to no avail. His death was a great blow to Karu and MS as well as to many leftists who were not happy about the alliance between the UNP and SLFP. They had been persuaded to give the alliance a chance because of the leadership of Sobhita. At his funeral in Independence square, the newly appointed leaders of the government made public pledges to follow in Sobhita’s footsteps. But in effect nobody did so, much to the disappointment of the monk’s followers who had undertaken the seemingly impossible task of defeating MR when political leaders were afraid to take the lead.

At one time in desperation Sobhita himself offered to contest in the absence of a credible candidate. After Sobhita’s death I spent some time at Naga Vihara to participate in the funeral arrangements. However I was appalled when a controversy regarding succession had developed even before the cortege had left the temple. One of the younger monks was known to me and he tried to drag me into the controversy, in his favour. But since I had not interacted much with him and adverse information came from Cornel Perera who advised me to stay clear, I lost interest in Naga Vihara affairs.

Little else except a larger than life statue of the charismatic priest erected near Parliament now remains as a reminder of the time when he led a movement consisting of different opposition groups to oust a powerful and confident President.

After a meeting with President Sirisena, MR agreed to relinquish his position as President of the SLFP. Thus Sirisena could hold the positions of SLFP leader and President of the Republic concurrently. This helped in getting a number of SLFP MPs appointed as Cabinet ministers under the new administration. CBK made a dramatic comeback after being sidelined from politics by MR during his tenure as President. Now she called the shots according to MS and played a big role in preparing the Cabinet together with Ranil.

Following usual procedures, Ranil would nominate the UNP Cabinet Ministers while MS, assisted by CBK, would appoint the SLFP Ministers. The SLFP members who were given Cabinet office were Amaraweera, Lakshman and Mahinda Yapa Abeywardene, Reginald Cooray, Duminda Dissanayake, SB Dissanayake, Fowzie, Piyasena Gamage, MKDS Gunawardene, SB Navinne, Felix Perera, Arjuna Ranatunga, Rajitha Senaratne, Janaka Bandara Tennakoon and myself I was appointed the Minister of Higher Education and Research. It was this hybrid Cabinet that was expected to steer the country till the general elections which were due in about six months time.

Of the large number of portfolios held by me, Higher Education was one which really attracted me. Right through my adult life I have maintained an interest in University education not least because I have had the privilege of being associated with several of the best Universities in the world. Also my Kandy electoral district boasts of hosting Peradeniya University and several other higher educational institutions. I had barely taken over when I had to confront a difficult situation in Colombo University. The MR administration had appointed a comparatively junior teacher as the Vice Chancellor on what appeared to be political grounds. I too knew the wife of the academic concerned who was a well regarded Professor on the same campus. My predecessor had left the question simmering and the faculty was now waiting expectantly, and somewhat skeptically, for my verdict.

I decided to play with a straight bat and appointed Professor Lalitha Mendis to the post of Vice Chancellor. Lalitha was greatly admired by the faculty for her integrity and independence. Fortunately the unpopular academic then decided to go on sabbatical leave and I was happy to facilitate it since he had to be helped to save face. He departed and the University settled down to its legitimate functions. We all heaved a sigh of relief.

My predecessor SB Dissanayake was my student at Vidyodaya University and I enjoyed a close relationship with him. He was a dynamic Minister who had expanded infrastructure facilities on many campuses. Several new halls of residence had been constructed at Peradeniya and the administration there had invited him to declare them open. However he had clashed with the students and they threatened to create mayhem if he visited the campus. SB had then left the matter pending and the halls of residence which he had constructed remained closed.

I had many of my youth leaguers at Peradeniya as undergraduates and they alerted me to this delay and invited me to come instead. But I thought I must set an example and as a politician, even though I was an alumnus of Peradeniya and a student leader of my time, keep away from such a routine University event. I instructed the Chairman of the Higher Education Commission Professor Sampath Amaratunge to participate in the opening ceremony on my behalf. The event was successfully concluded and my youth leaguers informed me that the undergraduates were appreciative of my gesture.

I travelled many times in and out of Peradeniya campus without security and never did I encounter any difficulty. On occasion I had to instruct the respective Vice Chancellors to get their campus premises cleaned up. I spoke particularly of the Colombo and Peradeniya Campuses. In my minds eye I could always see the impeccably maintained Peradeniya Campus of my time with its lush green, well trimmed lawns and the hundreds of flowering trees with their multi-coloured blossoms cascading down which made our campus a veritable garden paradise.

Colombo campus was a particularly bad offender in the maintenance department and I had to telephone Savitri Goonesekere to get the land near the Planetarium cleaned up. There were complaints about snakes in that wilderness. It was promptly cleaned and the Planetarium staff who had to ensure the safety of hundreds of students who regularly visited them were relieved and thankful.

An episode of food poisoning and dangers of weak English speakers at international events

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.