Top startups secure $ 160,000 funding at  First Capital Startup Nation by Hatch Demo Day

Three startups have secured funding worth $ 160,000 combined at the recently concluded First Capital Startup Nation by Hatch Demo Day.

Seven exceptional finalists pitched their ideas before a panel of local and international investors, with three startups emerging at the top, eligible for a combined $ 160,000 in funding: TorchLabs – Dhevin De Silva, Seashore Gardens – Shawn Senerath and Shavendra Rajapakse, and Docupath AI – Sheran Corera.

Each founder showcased how innovation and resilience continue to define Sri Lanka’s new-age entrepreneurs, connecting directly with investors and unlocking opportunities for collaboration and scale.

Reflecting on his experience, Dhevin De Silva of TorchLabs shared “It was great participating in First Capital Startup Nation by Hatch. I got to meet a lot of founders, network with investors, it was a valuable experience. Everyone should join this program in the future; it’s a great learning opportunity. To any young founder: get started now. You never know what’s on the next horizon.”

The highly anticipated First Capital Startup Nation by Hatch Demo Day lit up Colombo on 1 October 2025, as Sri Lanka’s brightest founders, investors, and ecosystem partners came together for a powerful evening of innovation, vision, and opportunity.

Hosted at Hatch’s flagship space, the event marked a defining milestone in the country’s startup journey, showcasing the depth of local entrepreneurial talent and the collaborative strength of Sri Lanka’s innovation community.

The evening began with the unveiling of the First Capital Startup Nation by Hatch, followed by opening remarks from First Capital Holdings PLC Chairman Rajendra Theagarajah and Hatch Co-Founder Jeevan Gnanam setting the tone for a night that celebrated both purpose and progress.

Hatch Co-Founder Jeevan Gnanam said: “Great ideas don’t happen in a single moment, they evolve through relentless questioning and refinement. What began in 2018 as a co-working space has become the central nervous system of Sri Lanka’s startup ecosystem.

“With $ 2 million already secured from Draper, existing investors, and GrowValley, and new initiatives like Mesh, HLab, and Hatch Funds, we’re not just building spaces, we’re building an ecosystem that powers a Startup Nation.”

He added, “Sri Lanka stands as a neutral bridge between East and West, a nimble testbed for South and Southeast Asia. With partners from nine countries here today, we’re proving that purpose and profit can grow together.”

First Capital Holdings PLC Managing Director/CEO Dilshan Wirasekara said: “This initiative represents a significant milestone in strengthening Sri Lanka’s startup ecosystem. The strong participation of over 100 founders and 50 global investors reflects the growing confidence in the country’s innovation potential. The discussions around policy, technology and investment frameworks will play an important role in shaping the next phase of entrepreneurial growth.”

“At First Capital, our focus remains on enabling progress through innovation and collaboration. Partnering with Hatch on the Startup Nation program aligns with our vision to support scalable businesses and create opportunities that empower all Sri Lankans to be part of a more dynamic, future-ready economy,” he added.

The event’s Silver Sponsor, Orion City Head of Marketing Sudheera Bandara said: “As a hub for innovation and technology, Orion City is proud to have been the Silver Sponsor of First Capital Startup Nation by Hatch.”

“The event showcased incredible talent within Sri Lanka’s startup community and reaffirmed our belief in nurturing a robust ecosystem where groundbreaking ideas can thrive,” he added.

Port City Colombo, as a Strategic Partner, was highlighted for its progressive and investor-friendly business environment that serves as a springboard for local and international startups to scale globally.

This Special Economic Zone (SEZ) addresses capital flight challenges by enhancing access to foreign funding, while supporting Sri Lanka’s vision of becoming a global innovation hub through the retention of both investment and top talent.