World’s oldest living person celebrates 117th birthday

(ABC News) - The world's oldest living person turns 117 on Friday.

Ethel Caterham, recognized by Guinness World Records as the world's oldest living person, shared a message with ABC News to mark her birthday.

"Thank you for all of the kind birthday wishes. Even at 117, I've had many firsts this year, from stroking a llama to holding hands with the King!" Caterham said. "I've had a lovely day celebrating with my family and friends, and I look forward to seeing what next year brings!"

Caterham met with King Charles III last September and shared her memories with him of watching his investiture as the Prince of Wales in 1969, according to the BBC.

Caterham was born in the United Kingdom on Aug. 21, 1909, when Charles' great-great grandfather, Edward VII, was king.

She was named by Guinness World Records as the world's oldest living person last year, after Brazilian nun Inah Canabarro Lucas died at the age of 116.

Guinness also recognizes Caterham as the world's oldest living woman.

"Wishing Ethel Caterham the happiest of birthdays, from Guinness World Records!" the organization said in a statement to ABC News. "Holding the GWR title for both the oldest person living and oldest woman living, is certainly something to celebrate! We hope she has a wonderful day with loved ones."

Caterham previously told The Associated Press that she thinks one of the secrets to her longevity may be her non-confrontational approach to others.

"Never arguing with anyone, I listen and I do what I like," she said at the time.

Caterham is the seventh of eight siblings, including one who lived to the age of 104, according to Guinness World Records.

Caterham outlived her late husband, Norman Caterham, who died in 1976, as well as their two children, daughters Gem and Anne. Today, she is a grandmother of three and a great-grandmother of five.

In her younger years, Caterham was a nanny and ran a nursery.

Caterham and her family are marking her milestone birthday this year with a private celebration, according to Guinness World Records.