Justice for All seeks for meeting with President; urges national preparedness amid West Asia risks

In an open letter to the Government, Justice for All has sought for an urgent meeting with President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, to ensure coordinated national preparedness to mitigate the potential fallout of the West Asia conflict, following a high-level consultation, which flagged vulnerabilities across the economy, food security, health and education.

The letter dated yesterday was sent by Justice for All Convener M. A. Sumanthiran.

“On 7 April 2026, Justice for All hosted a consultation on the impact of the war in West Asia on different sectors in Sri Lanka. Several Ministers and officials in the Government and Members of Parliament were invited to engage in the discussion and explore policy options that can benefit Sri Lanka. The consultation included brief presentations by experts in the areas of foreign policy, economic outlook, education and health sectors and food security that informed the discussion. The discussion highlighted the recent shocks experienced in Sri Lanka including the pandemic and economic crisis, with lessons that can be learnt and ideas for better preparation. There was consensus of the need for national preparedness and public information to tackle challenges in the short, medium and long-term.

nOur foreign policy should be based on the principle of neutrality and factor in the need for humanitarian action. It was also noted the importance of compliance with international laws and conventions and for clarity in terms of positions.

n On the economic front, despite the multiple uncertainties, present data show that Sri Lanka has sufficient buffers to withstand immediate shocks but will require careful planning and preparations.

nSri Lanka’s recent experiences on the education sector due to the pandemic and economic crisis provides us several lesson that can be immediately implemented. For example, it is essential that planning and decision making with regard to running of schools during crisis should not happen at the national level alone since different areas experience context specific challenges. It was also emphasised that measures such as school closure and online classes must be kept as the very last option. Priority should be given towards planning at regional and district levels so that decisions are informed by local level needs and realities.

nIn relation to the health sector, several factors such as demographic changes, inequity, malnutrition and others should inform policy formulation. Similar to the education sector, consultation and decision making should be decentralised. Additionally, procurement of medicines and mental health issues are also important areas that require attention.

n It was noted that food security is a key challenge and requires urgent attention. Considering setbacks with global supply chains and other challenges, attention must be on how best to manage fertilizer and food imports. Additionally, planning is required on the availability of food supplies and the affordability of such items. It was also suggested that clear guidelines are issued to maximise productivity, combat wastage, among others.

We share these brief points in the hope of constructive engagement when Sri Lanka is facing multiple socio-economic challenges that impact a cross section of society. In the past, Justice for All has undertaken similar initiatives. For example, we convened meetings in 2022 against the backdrop of the economic crisis to facilitate dialogue across different sectors and parties in the hope of building consensus. The present meeting was done in a similar spirit to engage with the government and others in exploring ways forward that benefit the people of Sri Lanka.

We request a meeting with Your Excellency and other relevant Ministers and officials to discuss these matters in more detail at a date and time convenient to you.”