Her emotions touched their hearts …and even made them cry

Turning up at office last Monday (10) was none other than Noshin De Silva – the lead actress in the film ‘Rayak Ho Payak.’

She turned up with her mum and we chatted as if we have been friends for years! And … guess what?

Although Noshin is Sri Lankan, by heritage, she was born and raised in Japan, until age 12, and then moved to the United States, where she completed middle school, high school, university, and her MBA in International Business.

Her role in ‘Rayak Ho Payak, ’ a thriller/suspense movie, is Aparna, a young mother facing the trauma of losing her child, and her acting has come in for high praise from those who have seen the movie.

She went on to say that many viewers mentioned to her that her portrayal of Aparna felt real and emotional.

“People said my emotions touched their hearts and even made them cry.

“Those comments mean the world to me. I feel rewarded as an actor when the audience can truly feel my emotions.

“Some people were surprised I could take on such a heavy, emotional role since I’m usually a happy and bubbly person, but that’s what I love most about acting … becoming someone completely different.

“I’m deeply thankful to my mom, brother, director, and producers for believing in me.”

Noshin, indeed, is a bubbly person, and that was my first impression of her when we met.

Obviously, I needed to know how she got involved in this movie and she explained:

“I met the Director concerned while attending an acting workshop in Chennai, India, and after seeing me perform, he offered me the role of Aparna.

“Believe me, I was instantly drawn to the character because the role required expressing deep emotions – sadness, panic, and unconditional love.

“This was my first role with such emotional depth and intensity, and I was excited to challenge myself.

“I took the role seriously, studying how a mother might feel and react in such an unimaginable situation.”

According to Noshin, the most challenging and memorable scene was when Aparna, after losing her daughter, reaches a breaking point and tries to self-harm.

“The emotions felt very real while filming, and I remained in that feeling even after the Director said “cut.”

“That moment taught me a lot about human pain and a mother’s unconditional love.”

Noshin then went on to explain the story connected with ‘Rayak Ho Payak’ which is a collaboration between India and Sri Lanka (with both Indian and Sri Lankan actors), and this is the storyline:

A young family from Chennai, in India, moves to Colombo, after the husband receives a new executive job, and soon after arriving in Sri Lanka, their daughter is kidnapped.

The film explores the emotional journey of a mother and father trying to find their child and highlights how life can change in an instant.

Filmed in Chennai, and various locations in Sri Lanka, ‘Rayak Ho Payak’ shows the strength of a mother’s love and the emotional resilience of a family facing tragedy.

In the US, Noshin worked in law and finance, and, most recently, as a Director of Finance.

“Education has always been my foundation. My mother taught me the importance of independence and knowledge, and acting and storytelling have always been my passion, since childhood.

“I was active in dancing, modelling, commercials, singing, and school plays, and, after establishing a stable career, I decided to pursue acting full-time.”

“This is my first film in Sri Lanka, but language has not been a barrier. I speak Sinhala, English, Japanese, and a bit of Spanish.

“While I sometimes struggle with very formal Sinhala (like news broadcasts), I’m continuously learning.

Well, what’s next for this extremely talented lady? And she went on to say that cinema is a universal language and that she loves Sri Lankan cinema,

“I’m open to not limiting myself to one country or industry.

“I’m open to challenging roles and meaningful stories in any language and I’m interested in a variety of genres – romantic comedies, romance, drama, real-life stories, and historical films.

I’m also interested in creating art, both on and off screens.”

Noshin has received a few new offers and recently finished filming a South Indian movie that is currently in post-production.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.