Sri Lanka MICE Expo 2026 opens, connecting global buyers with industry

The Sri Lanka MICE Expo 2026 (SL-MICE Expo 2026), organized by the Sri Lanka Convention Bureau (SLCB), under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism, officially commenced on yesterday at Shangri-La Colombo.

The multi-day event is designed to position Sri Lanka as a premier destination for Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Exhibitions (MICE).

With more than 120 hosted international MICE and travel operators, together with media representatives from 26 countries, the Expo provides a significant platform to strengthen Sri Lanka’s position on the global MICE map. It brings together local and international stakeholders to showcase their products, services and innovative solutions, while creating opportunities for business development, networking and collaboration among leading MICE professionals from around the world.

The opening ceremony was held under the patronage of  Vijitha Herath, M.P., Minister of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism, Prof. Ruwan Ranasinghe M.P., Deputy Minister of Tourism, Santosh Jha, High Commissioner of India to Sri Lanka and Aruni Ranaraja, Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism together with other distinguished guests and industry stakeholders.

The proceedings commenced on 05 October with a MICE Business Forum and Welcome Reception at Cinnamon Grand Colombo. The Business Forum featured a destination presentation and a high-level panel discussion focusing on Sri Lanka’s potential and opportunities as a global MICE destination.

The programme continued on 06 October with the official Opening Ceremony and B2B business sessions at Shangri-La Colombo, bringing together 125 plus Sri Lankan MICE suppliers and service providers with international hosted buyers. The B2B programme is expected to facilitate more than 10,000 business meetings, creating valuable opportunities for partnerships, business development and future events in Sri Lanka.