Sunshine Holdings sets standard for workplace excellence

Sunshine Holdings PLC has always believed that its people are the heart of its success. In its journey to create a high-trust, purpose-driven culture, it partnered with Great Place To Work, ( GPTW) the global authority on workplace culture, to enhance the employee experience across its sectors. Through ongoing assessments, feedback, and values-driven initiatives, the Group strengthened its culture of care while guiding teams through periods of change.

Group Chief People and Corporate Communications Officer, Michelle Senanayake noted that a key shift was from, “Assumptions to evidence-based action.” Insights from the Great Place To Work Trust Index Survey and regular pulse checks highlighted employees’ needs for clarity, trust, and belonging, leading to improvements in onboarding, leadership communication, and the launch of The Voice Sunshine feedback platform.

Employee surveys revealed gaps in onboarding and career visibility for frontline staff. In response, Sunshine enhanced its induction programs, added buddy systems, introduced cultural storytelling, and launched career clinics with clear growth paths, making employees feel seen, supported, and empowered.

Sunshine’s recurring Great Place To Work Certified status also reinforced its commitment to people and culture, strengthening its employer brand and attracting talent, including returning overseas Sri Lankans. Since earning Great Place To Work Certification, Sunshine Holdings paired the recognition with internal changes and revamped employee programs. Post-survey analysis and focus groups by GPTW analysts identified root causes across levels and units, leading to collaborative improvements. Subsequent surveys confirmed that these efforts have greatly enhanced employee experience.

Sunshine Holdings Group CEO Shyam Sathasivam said, “You can’t fake culture, our people are the storytellers,” a sentiment that reflects the organisation’s belief in the authenticity of its workplace environment.

Sunshine Holdings was named one of Sri Lanka’s Best Workplaces in 2024, further affirming its effective people practices and sustained trust and engagement across its employees.

Sunshine achieved stronger talent alignment with better-fit hires across entry-level, mid-career, and specialised healthcare roles. Retention strategies focused on purpose, growth, and belonging, reinforced through initiatives such as the Sunshine Skill Quest, cross-BU exposure, and guided interventions on recognition, psychological safety, and inclusive leadership.

Sunshine Holdings analysed insights at both group and unit levels, realising that a “one-size-fits-all all” approach wouldn’t work. With post-survey consulting and Culture Audit feedback, it tailored actions to unit-specific challenges, aligning people practices and leadership accessibility. Structured manager check-ins and standardised performance conversations further improved integration, reduced early attrition, strengthened succession pipelines, and enhanced collaboration for building resilience through transformation.

Michelle noted, “We witnessed a clear link between culture and business performance. By embedding fairness, wellness, recognition, and inclusion, we built a resilient, high-trust culture that sustains it even through political, economic, and sectoral challenges.”

Going forward, Sunshine plans to continue benchmarking their workplace culture and to transition from periodic assessments to continuous culture curation, and in strengthening ESG–HR linkages through initiatives. “We are bringing the Great Place To Work framework to life by how we live our values and lead with intention. The Great Place To Work assessment is a mirror, and not just a marketing tool. Culture takes time, but done right, it becomes your greatest asset. And above all, remember: when people find meaning in their work, business follows,” emphasised Michelle.