SHEvolve ’26: Empowering conversations, inspiring change

SHEvolve ’26, a pioneering women-empowerment initiative organized by AIESEC in University of Colombo, is set to take place on May 9th from 9.00 a.m. onwards at the New Arts Theatre, University of Colombo. Building on the success of its previous edition, which welcomed over 500 delegates alongside renowned guest Ms. Anudi Gunasekara, the Miss World Sri Lanka 2024, this year’s event promises to be even more impactful, bringing together voices that matter to spark dialogue and drive meaningful change.

Centered around the theme “Beyond the Surface: Rethinking the Realities of Being a Woman,” SHEvolve ’26 aims to challenge societal norms, address stigmas, and foster a deeper understanding of issues surrounding women’s lives. The event will feature a compelling panel discussion with distinguished panelists, including Ms. Gangulee Walpola, the Chief Guest of the event and an Attorney-at-Law based in Sri Lanka. She holds a Master’s degree in Law from the University of West London and currently works as a corporate attorney at a large manufacturing company. Alongside her legal work, she is also a professional singer and a content creator, Ms. Sade Greenwood, the Miss World Sri Lanka 2021 and the Co-founder of Mullwood, Sri Lanka’s first hair care brand for curly hair. She is also an advocate for self-expression and confidence, using her platform to promote inclusivity, beauty diversity, and women’s empowerment, Dr. Ayisha Ziauddin, a Family Medicine Physician, the current secretary of Zonta One Club of Colombo and the co-founder of the Muslim Women’s Collective, and Ms. Vithara Mannage, a lecturer at APIIT Sri Lanka specializing in Entrepreneurship and Business Management, with an MBA (Distinction) from the University of Staffordshire and current PhD candidate at the University of Colombo. Each panelist will bring unique perspectives to critical topics:

● = “Unlearning to Empower – Education, Mindsets & Breaking Internal Barriers”

● = “Voice, Visibility & Rights – Navigating Expression in the Digital Age”

● = “Prioritizing Herself – Women’s Health, Stigma & Awareness”

● = “The Pressure to Fit In – Beauty Norms & Social Expectations”

The event will also feature an inspiring keynote speech by Ms. Yasodhara Pathanjali, a British Sri Lankan life coach, educator, and co-founder of the Independent Collective School, Sri Lanka’s first modern alternative school. Alongside engaging and interactive sessions designed to create a dynamic and meaningful experience for all attendees, the program will also feature an entertainment session conducted by Anderson Kirubaharan, a stand-up comedian and public speaking coach.

Delegates will receive an e-certificate of participation, recognizing their involvement in this movement for change.

Adding a creative dimension, the event will also feature competitions in art and short video formats, providing participants with an opportunity to express their perspectives and contribute to the conversation in impactful ways. Registrations for both the event and competitions are now open.

SHEvolve ’26 invites all individuals who are passionate about driving social impact and fostering inclusive conversations to be part of this transformative experience. Join us in reshaping narratives, amplifying voices, and creating lasting change.

Pride in hospitality: Ranil Asanka’s story at ‘City of Dreams’ Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.