Sri Lankan teen charged after car hits Newcastle Knights fans

news.com.au - An 18-year-old man has been charged by police after ten people, including three children, were injured when a car drove into a crowd of thousands of Knights fans yesterday.

Indika Bambrick Samarasinghe has been charged with three instances of dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm, three instances of negligent driving occasioning grievous bodily harm and three instances of cause bodily harm by misconduct.

And it has now been revealed in court records that his licence was suspended in February and he appealed against the suspension in April, but was unsuccessful.

Appearing in bail court on Sunday, Samarasinghe did not apply for bail, and it was formally refused.

His lawyer Nicholas Cruz asked for the teenager to be assessed by prison health.

The court also heard that the maximum sentence for the most serious charge of dangerous driving is seven years. He will next appear in court on October 15.

Photos of Samarasinghe on social media show him posing alongside a BMW, which appears to be the one involved in the crash.

It comes after supporters lined the streets to send off the city’s NRL team in style in Newcastle on Saturday morning before tragedy struck around 9.30am when a P-plater lost control and struck several supporters on Newcastle Link Road at Transfield Avenue.

Emergency services rushed to the scene with ten people injured, ranging from two to 67.

All were treated at the scene before being taken to John Hunter Hospital, with two transported in a critical condition.

One critical patient, a 67-year-old man, is understood to no longer be critical.

The other, a five-year-old girl, who suffered a cardiac arrest, is in a serious but stable condition in John Hunter Hospital on Sunday morning.

The young girl was placed in an induced coma after suffering head injuries and broken bones, while her mother has a broken leg.

The eight other patients, a two-year-old girl, a five-year-old girl, two women aged 31 and 63, and four men aged 24, 25, 48 and 57, are in a stable condition — and three have been discharged.

The driver was arrested at the scene and taken for mandatory testing.

Samarasinghe was refused bail and will face court on Sunday. Police said the incident was not a deliberate act.

Fronting the media on Saturday afternoon NSW Police Assistant Commissioner David Waddell says the driver was driving “erratically” with two passengers in the vehicle when he crashed into the crowd.

“We had to get the three of them out of there because the crowd did turn on them,” Waddell said.

Police and Counter-terrorism Minister Yasmin Catley said the horrific crash was a “preventable” tragedy.

“A split-second decision can change so many people’s lives, and that is what has happened here today in our town,” she said.

“We’ve started Saturday morning with this devastation, and no one can turn back the clock now.

“It is an absolute tragedy, a tragedy that needn’t have happened. A tragedy that was preventable.”

While the Lord Mayor of Newcastle, Gavin Morris, told ABC News that the driver was there to take part in the celebrations.

“It is under investigation and the young driver is now with police,” he said.

“He was excited. He was a supporter. He was there for the joy of the moment as well. And somehow, yes, he has lost control of the car.”

One of the victims, Dave Martin, has been applauded after it was revealed his heroic actions saved both of his granddaughters.

Mr Martin managed to move the two girls to safety as the car veered towards them.

He was left with two broken legs and was taken to hospital, where he is recovering.

Sonia Hornery, the MP for Wallsend, said Mr Martin was a “Knights tragic” and she praised his quick-thinking.

“Dave was caring for his two young granddaughters and waiting to cheer on the Knights bus when he and several other people were tragically struck by a car,” Ms Hornery posed on Facebook.

“Dave managed to save his granddaughters and took the brunt of the strike, suffering multiple fractures in both legs.

“He underwent 8 hours of surgery in John Hunter Hospital and is now recovering. Dave’s a great bloke and I wish him well.”

What was meant to be an incredible moment for the town has now turned into one of fear and uncertainty, with crowds dispersing en masse as helicopters landed on the adjacent footy fields.

The team bus, meant to be cheered on by tens of thousands of Novocastrians, had to be diverted to another route.

“The incident has impacted the planned route of the Newcastle Knights grand final procession,” a NSW Police spokesman said.

“The procession was diverted via an alternate route, and the team bus has now departed Newcastle.

“Members of the public are asked to safely disperse from the area and keep roadways clear to assist emergency services and traffic management efforts.”

Knights officials confirmed they had left the city and were on their way to Sydney.

“Due to a major accident the team bus has been diverted from the planned route,” a Knights statement read.

“We apologise to anybody who was waiting and missed the boys but public safety is our priority.”

Knights captain Kalyn Ponga took to social media to write: “Our hearts are with everyone affected in Wallsend this morning.

“We’re thinking of you, your families and everyone in our Newcastle community. Sending our love and support.”

Ponga also sent well wishes to Chris Clancy, who shared a picture of himself in hospital after confirming he was one of the victims of the attack along with two others.

Revealing their injuries from the incident, Clancy said: “Hi all. Just letting you know myself, Tom and Matt were injured in the accident with the Newcastle supporters this morning.

“Tom has a graze on his left elbow but has been discharged all ready to go to the grand final tomorrow. Matt is still under observation but will more than likely be discharged soon with a graze and bit of bruising on his back.

“I have a broken left collarbone which requires surgery and may have a possible sprained or broken right foot. I will be JJH for a couple of days but will let you all know.

In response, Ponga said: “All the best with recovery mate! The team and community are with yas.”

NRL chief Peter V’landys also expressed his concern with what unfolded.

“We’re deeply saddened by the incident near Wallsend. We’re currently working with police to understand the circumstances,” he said in a statement.

“Our thoughts are very much with those injured and anyone impacted by these events, not to mention the entire Knights community who have come together in jubilation to support their team.”

Former NRL player Cooper Johns, whose dad Matty and uncle Andrew, played in the Knights’ last grand final success called for calm on social media.

“Thoughts are with these nine people and their family,” he posted on Instagram.

“Everyone look after yourselves this weekend. Scenes and excitement has been crazy but (we) don’t need any more thing(s) like this happening.”

“It’s heartbreaking to see fans who were sending off their grand final team involved in such a terrible incident,” he said.

“My thoughts are with the families and friends of loved ones who have been involved or injured in the crash. I also want to thank emergency services including police and ambulance who are responding to this tragedy.

“We’ve seen how this grand final has brought the Newcastle together, and I hope the whole community remains united as we continue to respond.”

Motorists are being urged to avoid the area around Newcastle Link Road.

Many Knights fans have already begun making the trip down the M1 to Sydney for the NRL Grand Final on Sunday.

The community is now coming to grips with what transpired this morning, with the horrible situation rocking the tight-knit town.

It cast a sad light on an otherwise ecstatic week for Novocastrians, with the entire city inspired by a team that has gone from last year’s wooden spooners all the way to the NRL Grand Final under new coach Justin Holbrook.

As reported by Channel 9, witness Adam Geosits has recounted pulling the driver from the car after the car narrowly missed his son, Hudson.

“We ran straight over, and he actually did try to leave the scene, so everyone yelled out, and we got the keys out of his car,” he said.