Elusive unity in crisis

Hope is said to ‘spring eternal’. So, when the Opposition urged President Anura Kumara Dissanayake to declare a state of emergency and offered to cooperate with the government on disaster management, many may have thought that the NPP and its political rivals would sink their political differences and unite for the sake of the country. But the government and the Opposition went for each other’s jugular soon afterwards.

The Opposition yesterday staged a walkout in Parliament, blaming the government for having denied it an opportunity to discuss disaster management policies, strategies and measures. It also claimed the government had ignored warnings of Cyclone Ditwah. The government stood its ground, and resorted to divisive rhetoric instead of trying to enlist the support of its political opponents for handling the post-disaster situation effectively. A truce between the two sides does not seem to be in the realm of possibility.

The Ditwah catastrophe could not have come at a worse time for Sri Lanka, which is struggling to straighten up its ailing economy and shore up its foreign currency reserves with a view to resuming external debt repayment in earnest in 2028. The actual cost of the weather disasters is yet to be calculated. It is bound to have a crippling effect on the economy, and only a truly national effort free from partisan politics will help the country to come to grips with it.

The SJB argued in Parliament yesterday that the Meteorological Department and the Irrigation Department had warned of the possibility of a cyclone, a couple of weeks before the occurrence of the catastrophic weather event. It said the water in major reservoirs should have been released gradually to obviate the need for opening their sluice gates suddenly causing floods downstream. It cited floods in Gampola as an example, and blamed the government for the lives lost.

Most of the MPs in the current Opposition, especially the members of the SJB, the SLFP and the UNP, were in the Yahapalana government, which failed to prevent the Easter Sunday terror strikes although it had received repeated warnings of the impending attacks. Now, they are hauling the NPP government over the coals for having ignored the warnings of a cyclone! However, the government is not without blame. During their Opposition days, the JVP/NPP leaders would inveigh against the previous governments for their failure to prevent deaths and other losses caused by disasters.

It never rains but it pours. Cyclones of the severity of Ditwah are rare phenomena in regions close to the equator, but climate change has created conditions for the formation of them, as Dr. Pathmakumara Jayasingha has pointed out in an article published in this newspaper today. So, Sri Lanka will have to remain vigilant and prepared to meet more such disasters. The government would do better to heed future warnings about catastrophic weather events, inform Parliament and adopt a consensual approach to disaster management.

Globally, there have been a considerable number of instances where adversarial party systems overcame their differences and prioritised national unity over partisan competition in times of crises. Their cooperation came either in the form of moral truces among political parties in the name of national interest, such as the Union Sacrée in France during World War I, or multi-party coalitions/unity governments like the special war time coalition in the UK in the early 1940s, the National Liberation Committee of the anti-fascist parties in Italy during the same period, and the Yahapalana government here. However, long-term political stability under such arrangements does not endure, with partisan politics resurfacing with the passage of time. Nevertheless, if the NPP government and the Opposition are so patriotic as they claim to be, they should be able to overcome their differences, subjugate their divisive political agendas to national interest and opt for a truce. They ought to practise what they preach.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.