Geneva: Claims and counterclaims

The Opposition is hauling the government over the coals for having allowed the latest UNHRC resolution against Sri Lanka to be adopted without a vote. Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa, speaking in Parliament on Thursday, tore into the government for having given in to international pressure in Geneva and made a compromise at the expense of Sri Lanka’s interests. He claimed the NPP had bungled the country’s Geneva strategy big time owing to its inefficiency and inexperience.

Responding to the Opposition’s claims, Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath told Parliament that votes for Sri Lanka at the UNHRC had decreased over the years. “Sri Lanka has only won one vote, and that was in 2009. The composition of the council makes it hard for a country like Sri Lanka to win a vote,” he said. This argument is not tenable. The government should have explained why it did not want to ask for a vote on the resolution against Sri Lanka at the UNHRC forum itself.

Instead of adopting a defeatist attitude, the NPP government should have cared to study how Sri Lanka had won a vote in Geneva in 2009. In any case, the government must discontinue the practice of allowing the UNHRC to ram resolutions down its throat. Otherwise, there will be no end to resolutions the UNHRC moves against Sri Lanka, according to the whims and fancies of the western powers swayed by influential lobbying groups sympathetic to the LTTE.

The outcomes of UNHRC votes are not determined by the council members’ human rights concerns or sense of justice. Instead, they are determined by the interests of strategic alliances that are not driven by human rights concerns at all. However, if Sri Lanka had asked for a vote, it would have been able to see who its real friends were. After all, it has been claimed that 43 out of 47 members spoke positively about Sri Lanka, and therefore the government would have been able to know whether they really meant what they had said and put their goodwill to test.

The JVP/NPP is no stranger to humiliating defeats in elections, which it contested, knowing that as for its success, it had the same chances as a snowflake in hell, so to speak. The election held in Parliament to elect an Executive President, as ousted President Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s successor in 2022 is a case in point. The NPP, which had only three MPs, fielded its leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake, who could secure only three votes including his own. It said it had taken part in that election as a matter of principle. Why it could not take up a similar position in Geneva the other day is the question.

The government has said it also factored in the cost of canvassing for support at the UNHRC when deciding whether to ask for a vote or not. It has not mentioned how much the country would have had to spend if it had decided to request a vote. Anyway, the cost factor should not have prevented the government from calling for a vote.

Government politicians have been travelling across the globe during the past several months at the expense of Sri Lankan taxpayers, and it is doubtful whether any tangible benefits have accrued to the country from their globetrotting. Foreign investment remains woefully low, and there are no signs of the situation improving in the near future. So, it is highly unlikely that concern over state funds played any role in the government’s decision to refrain from asking for a vote on the UNHRC resolution in question. The NPP will have to come out with a better argument to counter the Opposition’s claim that it made a compromise in Geneva despite its patriotic rhetoric.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.