SL Ambassador presents Letters of Credence in Kazakhstan

Ambassador Shobini Gunasekera (left) with Kazakhstan Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Alibek Kuantyrov

The Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the Russian Federation Shobini Gunasekera, with concurrent accreditation to the Republic of Kazakhstan, recently presented the Open Copies of Letters of Credence to Kazakhstan Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Alibek Kuantyrov in Astana.

Following the presentation, a discussion was held between Ambassador Gunasekera and Deputy Minister Kuantyrov.

Gunasekera reflected on the importance attached to Kazakhstan and Central Asia in Sri Lanka’s foreign policy and reaffirmed the commitment to further strengthening friendly relations and cooperation between the two countries, and deepening engagement with the region.

The Ambassador underscored the need to convene bilateral political consultations early this year to further deepen dialogue and cooperation. In this context, it was also suggested to establish a Parliamentary Friendship Group to serve as an important platform to enhance collaboration between the legislatures of the two countries. Ambassador Gunasekera also extended an invitation to Kazakhstan to participate in the Central Asia Dialogue to be scheduled in Colombo. The possibility of improving connectivity, including direct air links, and the signing of the Air Services Agreement were also highlighted as vital steps toward facilitating tourism and business exchanges between the two countries.

The discussion also noted that next year will mark the 35th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Sri Lanka and Kazakhstan, providing an important opportunity to further elevate bilateral cooperation. Both sides emphasised the importance of expanding collaboration in multiple sectors such as trade and investment, tourism, energy cooperation, education, and cultural exchanges.

Discussions further touched on a possible visit by a business delegation from Kazakhstan for the International Expo in Sri Lanka to be held in June 2026.

Both sides expressed confidence that the longstanding friendship between the two nations will continue to grow in the years ahead through enhanced dialogue, economic cooperation, and deeper people-to-people connections.