Kremlin says Ukraine talks with US envoys were useful; no sign of breakthrough

Reuters - Russian President Vladimir Putin held more than three hours of "highly useful" talks ​on Saturday with two U.S. envoys seeking a deal to end the Ukraine war, a Kremlin aide said, but he gave no indication of ‌any breakthrough.

The aide, Yuri Ushakov, said Americans Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner "outlined a number of ideas regarding possible avenues for a settlement". Ushakov did not say what these ideas were.

He said Putin had told the pair that Russia was making "real progress" on the battlefield and was confident of achieving its goals, while stressing the necessity of addressing "all the root causes of the conflict".

These are statements that Moscow has ​made repeatedly since Putin launched the full-scale invasion of Russia's smaller neighbour in February 2022. Both sides have intensified long-range air strikes in recent weeks while ​the front lines remain largely static.

A White House official told Reuters the talks had been "substantive" and that next ⁠steps would be announced in the coming weeks.

There was no comment from Witkoff and Kushner, who were visiting Moscow for the first time since January on behalf of President Donald ​Trump. They flew out of Moscow soon after the talks and are due to meet Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy in Kyiv on Sunday.

"The talks went beyond a mere exchange ​of views on resolving the Ukrainian crisis. Economic issues and potential major, mutually beneficial Russian-American projects were discussed in some detail," Ushakov said. "Overall, one can say that the negotiations were timely and highly useful for both sides."

Putin's investment envoy, Kirill Dmitriev, posted on X that the meeting had been an "important peacemaking visit". He and Ushakov were both present at the meeting.

The Russian president praised Trump's efforts to ​end the war.

"Understanding that he is entering a difficult situation, he nevertheless does not stop his efforts to help bring about a settlement and to make his contribution ​to resolving the Russian-Ukrainian conflict," Putin said in televised remarks at the start of the talks.

Trump suggested on Friday that the U.S. had a fresh proposal aimed at ending the war but did ‌not elaborate.

Putin promised ⁠to ensure the safety of the U.S. negotiators. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said earlier that Putin had ordered the Russian military not to strike Kyiv for three days because of their trip.

Over the previous 10 days, Russia pounded the Ukrainian capital day and night with missiles and drones, including an attack on Friday on the headquarters of the SBU security service.

Ukraine has inflicted damaging hits throughout the summer on Russian refineries, oil terminals and warehouses of online retailer Wildberries, in an attempt to raise ​the cost to Moscow of continuing the ​war. Zelenskiy said Kyiv was prepared to ⁠refrain from strikes on Moscow through Monday.

Russia and Ukraine remain far apart on how to end the war, the deadliest in Europe since World War Two.

A person close to the Kremlin, speaking before reports emerged of the trip by Trump's envoys, said Putin ​was still intent on capturing more territory.

"There is no chance of reaching an agreement regarding the front line until Putin finishes ​securing the remaining part ⁠of the Donetsk region," this person told Reuters, adding that the Kremlin leader was confident — based on reports from his commanders — that this would happen by the end of the year.

Western military analysts see such a possibility as remote, given Moscow's slow rate of progress. Ukraine has refused to surrender land it has successfully defended at huge cost, and rejects such terms ⁠as tantamount ​to surrender.

The Kremlin said on Friday the position that Putin set out in a speech two years ​ago — that Ukraine should cede the entire territory of four regions claimed by Russia and abandon its plan to join NATO — was "unshakeable".