Democrats sweep elections in New York, New Jersey, Virginia and California

The entirety of the Epstein files likely to be released next week

The deep blue state of New York, elected as the mayor of its greatest city, New York City, the financial capital of the world, its Democratic candidate. No surprise there. The anomaly was that the choice was 34-year-old, Ugandan-born, first-generation immigrant, Zohran Mamdani, who was espousing the progressive movement started by President Franklin. D. Roosevelt in 1945.

FDR’s New Deal dealt with the Great Depression of the early 1930s, and continued until the 1980s, which had by then included social security, unemployment and disability insurance and provision of a just social safety net, with equitable taxation programs.

The Republican western film actor/president, Ronald Reagan, arguably the first true conservative president since WWII, went on to dismantle a thriving middle class, by embracing the theory of “supply side economics” aka “trickle-down economics”.

He changed the demographic composition of the Republican Party of today: lower taxes, fewer corporate regulations against pollution of the environment and a strong military.

It’s a pity that Reagan decided to quit his Hollywood job and run for the presidency. Hollywood’s gain was the nation’s loss.

After Reagan’s presidential terms, words like “liberal”, “progressive” and the more recent “woke” were considered to be insulting epithets. These words represent the economic policies of 29 of the 30 world’s developed nations which follow the progressive ideology of socialist democracy.

Such a post-Reagan democratic socialist movement had existed in the USA, led by Senator Bernie Sanders, espoused by a growing minority in the House, led by Alaxandra Ocasio-Cortez. The election of a self-confessed socialist in Mamdani – the first words of his acceptance speech as mayor contained the name of Eugene Debs, the American Communist Party leader, who contested the presidency from prison in 1920 – is a positive indication that he is proud of his liberal values.

The Sanders movement is gaining in popularity, and will be the moving force behind the current Democratic Party, whose performance during the past eight years has been nothing short of abysmal, with its leadership behaving like moderate members of the Republican Party.

The first major elections during the second Trump administration were held on November 4, in New York City, Virginia, New Jersey and California. They were supposed to be close, a referendum on Trump’s second term performance. All four elections proved to be a big night for the Democrats, with moderates Mikie Sherill and Abigail Spanberger becoming governors of New Jersey and Virginia, respectively. California said YES to Proposition 50, which will allow state legislators to redistrict the state before the midterms, in an effort to stop Trump led “gerrymandering” in other Republican states.

The Democrats, with the wind at its back, with the electorate generally disgruntled with Trump’s blatant lies about his performance, as shown by the seven-million strong protest in over 250 cities against Trump two weeks ago. The Democrats had the ideal opportunity of showing the American electorate that the Republican administration was unable to govern, with the continuance of the 40+ day of the government shutdown, even with control of both Houses of Congress and the presidency.

Trump has vowed that Obamacare will not be renewed when it expires at the end of the year, which will take away healthcare benefits from 42 million Americans. The renewal of Obamacare, at existing premiums, was the major demand of the Democrats, if they were to sign off on Trump’s One Big Beautiful Bill, which would not renew Obamacare on expiry. This would compel the 42 million Americans deprived of Obamacare to negotiate for much higher premiums with private insurance companies. The majority would be unable to afford these high premiums, and would not have any health insurance cover.

Against the will of the Party, against the wishes of the large majority of Democratic Senators and governors, Schumer persuaded six other Republican Senators and one Independent (who, like Schumer, had originally vowed that their approval for the Republican Democratic budget bill will be given only over their dead bodies), all gave various highly sanctimonious reasons why they had decided to stay alive, which could be summarized in one word: “survival”. They have espoused the motto of the Republican Party; “Career before Party and Country”.

The totally ineffective Charles Schumer must resign his position as minority Senate leader immediately, if the Democrats are to have any chance of outwitting the Republicans in any future elections, especially the midterms which are under a year away, and will be their last opportunity of getting control of Congress.

Two more years after the 2026 midterms under Republican control of either House will enable Trump and the Republicans complete the authoritarian agenda detailed in the Heritage Foundation Project 2025. They are halfway there already. Unless the Democrats have strong leadership, the Republicans are quite capable of scuttling the midterms next year, and even rigging/eliminating the presidential elections in 2028. And transform the USA into an authoritarian kleptocracy,

California Governor Gavin Newsom, New York Congresswoman Alexandra Ocasio-Cortez are widely tipped to take over the leadership of the Democratic Party. The sooner the better.

The 30th Annual United Nations climate change conference began on Monday, November 30, in the Brazilian city of Belem, attended by representatives of every nation in the world bar renowned climate scientist, Donald J. Trump, who is also the President of the most powerful nation and leading polluter in the world. Trump refused to send representatives to the conference to discuss climate change, which, in his expert opinion, is a hoax. Trump proved his point during his recent unending speech at the United Nations. Below is an extract:

“It’s the greatest con job ever perpetrated on the world, in my opinion. Climate change, no matter what happens, you’re involved in that. No more global warming, no more global cooling. All of these predictions made by the United Nations and world (sic) many others, often for bad reasons, were wrong. They were made by stupid people that have cost their country’s fortunes and given those same countries no chance for success”.

This is the opinion of the one person in the world who has the power to destroy the planet before climate change does. Too close to call which would come first.

The other hoax that has finally emerged, after years of rumors, is the release of the Epstein Papers. Incriminating, and funny emails, where Epstein described U.S, President Trump as “the dog that hasn’t barked” and stated Trump spent hours alone with a sex-trafficking victim (under-age girl) at Epstein’s home on April 11, 2025.

All emails, which number thousands of other documents from the Epstein estate, have not been released, and it is not ethical to use a few of these emails out of context. However, the news of these emails, photographs and the other of the hundreds of hoaxes in Trump’s life will make our otherwise boring lives most interesting. Have you ever considered how boring your US news would have been if Trump hadn’t burst into the US political scene in 2016?

The vote which will be taken to release the entirety of the documents, photographs, etc. will be taken next week. At present, the vote to release the files has a majority of one, but the White House will apply considerable pressure on previously loyal Trumpers like Loren Boebert or Marjorie Taylor Greene to take one for the team and change their votes. Trump has been more famous for getting out of impossible situations with more skills than the Great Houdini.

The ultimate question would be if the Epstein files serve as a distraction from the fallout of the government shutdown for 43 days, or whether the shutdown is the distraction from the release of the Epstein files. The hundreds of victims, mainly little girls at the time of their abuse during the Epstein/Maxwell sex-trafficking operation, must get the justice they richly deserve.

Finally, Trump talked about “affordability”, another word he says he invented. He lied about how prices of groceries have gone down after he took over the administration in January; rents have gone down, gas has gone down, electricity bills have gone down (all provable lies), capping it with the statement that “Walmart just announced that their standard annual Thanksgiving meal is 25% lower than one year ago”. For once, Trump is right. But the 2025 Walmart Thanksgiving hamper contains far fewer items than the 2024 edition. So Trump’s record as a liar remains without blemish.

Breaking the pattern in the name of travel:Different kind of guidebook

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.