Christell shines a spotlight on longevity

From left: Christell Luxury Wellness Metabolic Lab Head Dr. R. Hiruni Poornima, CEO & Anti-Aging and Regenerative Medicine Specialist Dr. Shanika Arsecularatne and Hair Restoration Specialist Dr. Nilaharan Robinson

Christell Luxury Wellness hosted ‘Age Gracefully’, an exclusive evening bringing longevity, preventive health, regenerative medicine, beauty and wellness into the spotlight.

Held at The Shoppes at City of Dreams, the event brought together distinguished guests, industry leaders and luxury wellness partners around a critical question that frames our everyday lives: How can we live longer, healthier and better?

At the heart of the evening was an overview of longevity and preventive health led by Dr. Shanika Arsecularatne, CEO & Anti-Aging and Regenerative Medicine Specialist of Christell Luxury Wellness. The event focused on the concept of longevity through a luxury wellness experience, encouraging people to focus on their long-term health through awareness, preventive measures, health optimization and a proactive mindset to ageing.

While the global conversation around longevity is rapidly growing, Christell’s emphasis on longevity and preventive health has been built for over 30 years.

Christell has continuously evolved with advances in science, technology and regenerative medicine.

Age Gracefully represents the next chapter of that journey — advancing beyond looking good to living healthier and ageing better.

Guests experienced this philosophy through interactive health and wellness experiences, including a ‘Check Your Health Status’ quiz, Vitamin Level Test demonstration and Hair Scan demonstration, alongside luxury beauty, fragrance and wellness experiences by Exclusive Lines, Zam Gems and Dilmah.

The evening highlighted an important shift in modern lifestyle that has become prevalent around the world: prevention begins long before illness strikes, and good health and longevity are closely intertwined.

As Sri Lanka begins to embrace this new conversation, Christell continues to champion a future where beauty, science, preventive health, regenerative medicine and longevity come together. The measure of a healthy life is no longer simply to live longer – it is to live better, for longer.