Tokyo Cement Group and Foundation of Goodness: A decade of nurturing cricketing dreams

Tokyo Cement Group extended the sponsorship of Cricket Coaching Camps with the Foundation of Goodness (FoG) for the 10th consecutive year. Over the past decade this transformative partnership has opened doors for hundreds of aspiring schoolboys and schoolgirls from remote backgrounds to rise through the ranks and make their mark at divisional, national, as well as international cricket. This year’s sponsorship will primarily focus on the Northern coaching camp, with the aim of creating more opportunities for talented young players from the region to chase their cricketing dreams.

In its ten-year history this impactful partnership between Tokyo Cement Group and the Foundation of Goodness has produced 23 exceptional young cricketers from the North and South representing Sri Lankan national teams. To date, nearly 4,200 children from the North and 3,780 from eight schools across 35 southern villages have benefited from the coaching camps led by professional trainers. This includes multiple superstars in the Sri Lanka Women’s National Team, such as Kaveesha Dilhari, Sachini Nisansala, Imesha Dulani, Kawya Kavindi, Umasha Thimeeshani, Nilakshana Sandamini, Sathya Sandeepani, Sachini Gimahani, and many others, bringing unprecedented glory to the country, including winning the Women’s T20 Asia Cup 2024. The FOG Cricket Academy is also the powerhouse behind star players in the men’s national U19 team including Vijayakanth Viyaskanth, Navod Paranavithana, Malsha Tharupathi, Haren Weerasinghe, and S. Mathushan among others.

This year the Northern cricket camp proudly celebrated two of its brightest talents, V. Akash from Heartley College and K. Muthulan from St. John’s College in Jaffna, being selected to the Sri Lanka U19 National Squad for the 2025 West Indies tour. Furthermore, the Southern coaching camp celebrated the outstanding performance of Rathgama Devapathiraja College’s U17 Team, comprised of regular campers, led by the 2024/25 MCC at Lord’s Scholarship recipient Arosha Sithumina, to win the U17 A-Division Championship. Furthermore, the MCC facility in Hikkaduwa also produced champions, with Sri Sumangala College winning 16 consecutive matches to claim both the U19 Two-Day and One-Day Division 3 titles, a historical school record that earned a promotion to Division 2.

Dutch Trails honored at Presidential Environment Awards 2025 for exceptional commitment to sustainability

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.