Saving a Life and the First ‘Peopleisation’

LESSONS FROM MY CAREER: SYNTHESISING MANAGEMENT THEORY WITH PRACTICE – PART 23

I continue to share interesting stories from my stint at the Employees’ Trust Board, where I served as Chairman, and the then-President asked me to undertake some innovative new initiatives rather than just administer the institution.

Many young females in the office were either having babies or were pregnant. They would often take unannounced leave to attend to their children, who were having some issue or other. The sudden absence of staff without notice, particularly at the managerial level, was significantly hampering our operations. I had gained expertise in the science and art of preventing childhood illnesses through my own experience. From the time my son was a baby, we always consulted the well-known paediatrician at the time, Dr (Mrs) Stella De Silva. Many parents dreaded going to her because she would often reprimand them for making mistakes due to ignorance.

We were prepared to be reprimanded because we had complete confidence in her abilities. My wife adopted a wise strategy. Before a consultation with Dr Stella, she would prepare two sets of questions. One list with intelligent questions was to be asked by her, and the other list of questions, which bothered us very much, but perhaps for which answers should have been known by us; the obvious ones, were mine to ask.

I start with the first question from my list, and Dr Stella would give me a good stare and say, “You are a very ignorant man, go and read Dr Spock’s book”. Dr Benjamin Spock, the famous American Paediatrician, was a well-known author of several books on baby and child care. After my first question, it is my wife’s turn with her “intelligent” questions, and Dr Stella would say, “Wonderful question. I wish my medical students asked questions like that”. At the end of the questions, the diagnosis and the prescription, Dr Stella would give me a pitiful look, as if to say, “This intelligent woman has married such an ignorant man”. The result was that I got Dr Spock’s book, and read it from cover to cover, and thus became a master of managing babies and infants.

When I questioned my staff who were having infants, I was horrified to realise how ignorant they were. I immediately arranged lectures at an educational unit of the Department of Health and at a nearby private hospital. The staff really appreciated this initiative and claimed they had gathered a great deal of helpful knowledge. I arranged to repeat these lectures on multiple occasions. Absenteeism reduced. The staff greatly appreciated the programme, and the general health of the infants perhaps improved.

At around the same time, President Premadasa called for a meeting to discuss two strategies. We were emerging from a rebellion where many state assets had been destroyed, and the disruptions and work stoppages were taking a toll on the economy. He instructed us to consider two initiatives: one was to link the economy to all members of the fund, and the other was to improve the nutritional level of female employees. The President had analysed that if member employees or their spouses had a microbusiness, they would not want the economy to be disrupted. Stitching garments for sale or making foodstuffs for the market would add to the family income. These micro-entrepreneurs would never want the economy to be disrupted or face curfew, as their income would be impacted. If the great majority of the population is thus positively linked to the economy, there would likely be a more peaceful environment. This was a sound idea, but we were unable to bring it to fruition before the President’s demise. It required a fool-proof framework where we would serve as a funder for such ventures. The logic was sound, but the implementation was complex.

The second initiative was the nutrition enhancement programme. We initially examined the problem using the available data. We found that the percentage of low-birth-weight babies in Sri Lanka was the highest in the region. We had several discussions with an eminent panel of nutritionists and spent a whole day preparing a suitable action plan. According to these nutritionists, there is a consensus that micronutrients play a significant role in enhancing nutrition. This was contrary to the older generation of medical practitioners who did not believe in vitamin and mineral supplements. Perhaps they did not notice that, with the newly opened economy, unhealthy, convenient food had become more prevalent.

The panel of nutritionists educated us on many facts that were previously unknown to most laypeople. One notable observation was that the Sri Lankan dietary lifestyle includes a cup of tea after breakfast and also after lunch. The tannin in the tea blocks the absorption of iron. This is especially relevant for female workers. The conclusion was that young married females would need vitamin C to boost iron absorption. Finally, the panel of experts recommended that employers provide a dose of worm treatment first, followed by a daily dose of vitamin C, vitamin A&D, a multivitamin, and an iron supplement for females. This is all I recall. There may have been other vitamins or supplements which I cannot remember now. We actively promoted this initiative among employers, but were unable to evaluate the extent to which it was implemented. The treatment at that time cost only LKR 35 per person per month. I recall one foreign investor telling me that, considering the over a thousand factory workers he had, the total cost for the entire staff for a month for these vitamins would still be less than his monthly drinks bill.

I tried this with a sample of about fifty volunteers at our ETF Board office. We had both males and females in the group. Since I was also concurrently the non-executive Chairman of Dankotuwa Porcelain, I tried it there as well. The mid-programme review revealed that several had given up the programme. You will be surprised at the reason. They complained that they did not experience the usual regular cough and cold, which, in their opinion, was essential to clear their lungs and clear their heads. Such were the primitive beliefs. Some females had given up suspecting that they would gain weight. At the end of the three-month trial, both institutions reported that the workers had experienced less fatigue, fewer illnesses, and increased energy levels, even after a hard day’s work. Some males reported that the females in their office and factory looked prettier after these three months. The trial was deemed successful, but alas, President Premadasa, whose idea it was, was no longer with us to hear the result.

Another concern of President Premadasa was the plight of female workers in the free trade zone, who came from distant villages. They were housed in awful conditions with poor sanitary and bathing facilities. They were also subject to harassment from “predators” . Our initial plan was to build hostels with ETF funds, but the local politicians would have none of it. Their constituents were making a good living by charging rent for substandard accommodations, and they would obviously be financially affected. Finally, we settled on a scheme where we would provide a subsidy for additional rooms, toilets, and new wells. The landlords got a good deal, the workers got better accommodation, and the politicians got their votes. All were happy.

The boarders had demarcated areas for their cooking, but a survey revealed that they had no knowledge of nutrition. We organised several batches at the BOI office, utilising expert resources and educating them on proper nutrition at a lower cost. With all the advanced HR strategies I believe these practical initiatives were very beneficial and generated greater loyalty.

During my stint at the Ceylon Tyre Corporation, one facility that impressed me was the well-equipped medical centre. First, it was staffed by two doctors on a full-time basis, and thereafter by private practitioners who would come during their lunch break. Every employee had a file containing the complete history of their ailments and all prescriptions that had been dispensed free of charge. I, too, had made use of the facility, as had a large number of employees. A competent staff nurse would also dispense medicines for minor ailments.

At the ETF, I found that many people had minor issues but lacked the desire or time to seek medical advice. I decided to set up a mini clinic in one fully enclosed cubicle. The Occupational Health Division of the Labour Department had a permanent medical officer. He agreed to my request to visit the ETF three days a week during midday and examine those in need of a diagnosis. It had a significant demand on the first day. At the end of the session, the doctor met me in my office and said that there is a young girl who is in the last stages of pregnancy and who needs a blood transfusion without delay. If not, her life would be at risk. This was shocking, and immediately our personnel division sprang into action, taking the necessary steps in the nick of time. Her life was saved. It is one of my most outstanding achievements. Dr De Alwis, whose intervention saved this girl’s life, was very proud of the achievement. This was a boost to the clinic initiative, and we continued it. From the number of people who used this facility, I realised how convenient it is to have such an arrangement in-house. If not, they would have had to take leave to consult a doctor.

Under the then government’s programme of privatisation, United Motors was the first to be peopleised. President Premadasa had coined the term “Peopleisation” to make it more acceptable to the population than the term “privatisation”. All employees were to be given free shares, amounting to 10% of the entity’s share capital, based on their years of service. That was another reason for the term “Peopleisation”. United Motors was taken over by the government many years before and was renamed GOBU of United Motors. Several others too were taken over and operated as Government-Owned Business Undertakings. In all these GOBU’s a Competent Authority ran the administration. Some examples are the well-known Colombo Commercial Company and the Buhari Hotel, a restaurant in Maradana that serves biryani. The Government came under ridicule for taking over the inconspicuous Buhari Hotel, and no one could understand which part of the Government’s economic strategy this takeover fitted into. Now the tide had turned and the Government was desirous of exiting from all these commercial ventures.

The ETF Board was asked to participate in the underwriting of the public issue of United Motors shares. It was a difficult task, as our overzealous legal team wanted numerous changes to the underwriting document. The ETF Board had a superb Chief Legal Officer, who left no stone unturned. The other underwriters were quite annoyed, but finally our lady had her way. After some haggling over the underwriting commission and the devolvement fee the “Peopleisation” went through, and the entity became a publicly listed United Motors Lanka Ltd. Today, it is United Motors Lanka PLC and has many good agencies. It was ironic that many years later, I was appointed its chairman.

Another significant milestone for the ETF Board was the capital reduction of Colombo Dry Docks Ltd to enable a foreign investor to come in. The Dry Docks was a massive project. I recall visiting it on a programme organised by the Institution of Engineers during my younger days. It was mooted by Hon. Lalith Athulathmudali when he was the Minister of Ports and Shipping, with a vision of developing the Colombo Port as one of the most sought-after in the region. The original company was Colombo Dockyard Ltd, and a new company, Colombo Drydocks Ltd, was established, with a massive dry dock, with the expectation of public investment to facilitate its listing. The Government had no money for such a significant investment. When the public investment failed to materialise, Government Institutions such as the Ports Authority and the ETF were required to invest. It was a turning point for the Colombo Port, but it gave no return for the investors. It was running at a loss. This investment was a significant percentage of the ETF’s total portfolio at the time. All operations of ship repair and shipbuilding were administered by the Colombo Dockyard. Still, accounting was handled under Colombo Drydocks Ltd. I was on the Board of both companies, as ETF held a significant stake.

The Government looked for an investor, and after a couple of foreign dockyards showed interest, the proposal by Onomichi Dockyard of Japan was accepted. There was a requirement to carry out a capital reduction for state sector shareholders and cancel the Government bonds held by them. The Board of ETF could not agree to the terms because the fund would incur significant losses. However, the Board noted that there was no alternative. I wrote to the Secretary of Ports and Shipping, Mr T.K. Dissanayake, stating that we cannot afford this loss and cannot agree to the terms. Later, I called him and said that, officially, I cannot agree, but I realise that there is no alternative; therefore, please go ahead. The capital reduction was completed with no impact on the private shareholders. I refused to cancel the bond issued to the ETF, and after negotiations with the Ministry of Finance, they agreed to issue a new 30-year bond at 1% interest in its place. Onomichi Dockyard came into Colombo Dry Docks Ltd, the listed company, and later Colombo Dockyard Ltd was liquidated. Since most shipping companies were more familiar with the name Colombo Dockyard, Colombo Drydocks Ltd was later renamed Colombo Dockyard Ltd. This part of history is now forgotten, as I realised during the recent crisis the company went through, and when I explained the history to a young professional.

Once, while relaxing after dinner, I received a call from the Cabinet Office informing me that I was required to appear at the Cabinet meeting. The caller had no idea what it was about, and that was a problem because how can I be prepared if I have no clue about the matter to be discussed? With no driver available at that time, I had to drive and park myself. I was asked to park near the General Post Office and then come to the old Senate Building, where the meeting was held. When I was called in, I was asked what interest we had paid the previous year and what the EPF had paid. Fortunately, I enjoyed studying numbers, and these were fresh in my mind, so I rattled them off.

ETF returns were less than the EPF returns. The President was very pleased because my response tallied with what he had thought and was contrary to what Hon Lalith Athulathmudali had claimed. I was asked to explain further and had to disclose that some significant investments, such as in Dry Docks, Dockyard, Lanka Cement, and Dankotuwa Porcelain, were not yielding any returns. The lesson here for heads of government institutions is to store essential figures in their memory. I just could not have said that I will give the figures the next day after I got to the office and checked the files. I must disclose here that by the time I left the ETF Board, the portfolio was balanced and yielding a higher return than the EPF.

The next episode will cover my departure from the ETF Board, including my tenure as Chairman.

Awardee of the APO Regional Award for promoting Productivity in the Asia Pacific Region

Recipient of the “Order of the Rising Sun, Gold and Silver Rays” from the Government of Japan.

Tender Boards, Katunayake runway and the day an OA asked JRJ to “go to hell”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.