Largest nation-wide protests in history against Trump on Saturday, March 28

Iran war escalates despite Trump’s claims about negotiations for peace

Donald Trump is now pretending to negotiate a peace on the war against Iran he declared on February 28. A war for no reasons, with no provocation from Iran. A war Israel Prime Minister Netanyahu had been planning against Iran for decades.

Trump posted a threatening message on Truth Social in the wee hours on Sunday, March 22, that, unless Iran opens the strait of Hormuz within 48 hours, he will obliterate the nation.

“If Iran doesn’t FULLY OPEN, WITHOUT THREAT, the strait of Hormuz within 48 HOURS, from this exact point in time, the United States of America will hit and obliterate their various POWER PLANTS, STARTING WITH THE BIGGEST ONE FIRST. Thank you for your attention to this matter. President Donald Trump”.

Then, on Sunday evening, Trump said he had received a very valuable gift, worth a ton of money from Iran, which made him realize that he was not talking to the “right people”. The present, a couple of oil tankers. produced a change of Trump’s heart regarding the war. Presents, technically bribes, like the $400 million flying palace he received from Qatar, are the only direct line to Trump’s heart.

So, less than 24 hours after his “obliteration” threat, Truth Social carried the following post:

“I AM PLEASED TO REPORT THAT THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE COUNTRY OF IRAN, HAVE HAD, OVER THE LAST TWO DAYS, VERY GOOD AND PRODUCTIVE CONVERSATIONS ASSURING A COMPLETE RESOLUTION OF OUR HOSTILITIES IN THE MIDDLE EAST. BASED ON THE TENOR AND TONE OF THESE IN-DEPTH, DETAILED AND CONSTRUCTIVE CONVERSATIONS, WHICH WILL CONTINUE THROUGHOUT THE WEEK, I HAVE INSTRUCTED THE DEPARTMENT OF WAR TO POSTPONE ANY AND ALL MILITARY STRIKES AGAINST IRANIAN POWER PLANTS AND ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A FIVE-DAY PERIOD, SUBJECT TO THE SUCCESS OF THE ONGOING MEETINGS AND DISCUSSIONS. THANK YOU FOR YOUR ATTENTION TO THIS MATTER. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP.

At a press conference, Trump said that he’s giving Iran five days to negotiate a deal that will benefit everyone. When asked what he would do if no deal was worked out in five days, he said he would have no option but to annihilate Iran. So Iran would be annihilated in five days, (now increased to ten), as the 15-point conditions US by submitted by Trump during these “negotiations” were totally unacceptable to Iran. And vice versa. But in the highly unlikely event that agreement was reached, Trump was asked who would run the strait of Hormuz, his response: Me, maybe me, with an Ayatollah whom they hadn’t killed, as yet.

As expected, Trump’s post about peace negotiations caused a tumble in the price of a barrel of oil from $100+ to $84 within hours, with the corresponding optimism in the stock market. But the continuing hostilities after Trump’s peace message during the week pushed the price of a barrel of oil back to $100+. There was a flurry of trading of nearly $500 million in the hours between these two contradictory posts – and someone (I wonder who) made a killing on the stock market with obvious insider knowledge.

There has been complete silence from Iran to Donald’s empty threat. Iran’s Foreign Ministry confirmed that no such negotiations had taken place between Teheran and Washington. Iran refused to take Trump’s threats seriously and its collective middle finger towards the White House was clearly visible over the oceans.

Prime Minister of Canada, Marc Carney, has taught smaller nations being intimidated by Trump that the only way to handle him is to call his bluff. To paraphrase Shakespeare, to ignore Trump’s meaningless bluster, “told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing”.

Until 2016, the USA was considered the leader of the free world, not because it had the largest economy, not because they had the most powerful military in history, but because the post WW2 US treated other nations, especially its NATO allies, with respect. And all the nations which had dealings with the USA, appreciated that, and competed against each other to deliver the best deal to the USA.

Trump had recently been insulting Canada, its closest ally of over 300 years and largest economic partner with $800 billion of annual trade, sharing the longest border in the world. Canadians and Americans had fought side by side in World War II, and Canadians were the first to join the Americans in their war against Afghanistan after 9/11. Trump, to whom loyalty and friendship is a one-way street, had been stating that Canada was dependent on the USA, and should really be its 51st state, with Carney as its Governor. He made this belittling statement at a meeting with Carney at the Oval Office.

I do not intend to repeat the qualifications of Prime Minister Carney, which I have extolled before. Suffice to say he holds the highest degrees in Economics from Harvard and Oxford, and served as the Governor of the Central Banks of both Canada and the United Kingdom, the only non-Brit to hold that post in history. An added qualification: he has never been a politician, had never held elected office.

Carney showed no indignation at Trump’s “offer”. He most politely told Trump that the people he represents will never agree to such a proposal, that Canada will never be for sale.

Carney had been expecting this increase in taxes for months, and had already successfully negotiated alternative trade deals for Canadian products with other nations, members of NATO, Japan and Australia. And more importantly, he had shown smaller nations, which had hitherto been intimidated by the power of the USA, how to deal with Trump. Instead of individually toadying to Trump’s America, smaller nations could work together instead of competing against each other. This policy may cause temporary economic hardship, but would have the luxury of maintaining their self-respect.

Trump realized that his economic policies, especially on tariffs and his wars were dragging the US economy to a recession. His approval ratings, with the crucial midterm elections just a few months away, were at 36%, the lowest levels in presidential history. Even his Republican base was turning against many of his policies, especially the latest illegal war against Iran. An “excursion”, as he called it, draining the economy with no objective in sight, had already caused the loss of 13 American lives. His public comment that there will be more losses of thousands of lives as the war progresses, especially if he carries out his plan of putting boots on the ground in Iran, infuriated Americans of all stripes. And the “most unkindest cut of all”: his pet Supreme Court ruled against him, with a 6/3 majority, that the power to levy taxes and tariffs lay, according to Article 1 Section 8 of the constitution, exclusively with Congress. All tariffs levied by Trump without even consultation with Congress, from April 2, 2025 (“Liberation Day”) to date were unconstitutional and had to be refunded to the importers and consumers.

J. A. Baker, in The Peregrine, said that “the hardest thing of all is to see what is really there.” Perhaps, as incredible as it may seem, Trump has seen the light, he may have seen what is really there, the chaos he has wrought, with inflation at third-world levels, gas and grocery prices out of control, the wait-time at most airports longer than the actual flight time, his illegal immigration policies resulting in arrest, imprisonment and even killing two American peaceful protesters without due process, has infuriated the American people. His ratings are in the pits and the United States has become the Most Hated Nation in the Free World. America First is now America Alone, embraced only by past adversaries, who are taking full advantage of his narcissistic stupidity.

Time will tell if the impossible has happened, that Trump has realized that he has lost the confidence of his base, and would be forced to abandon his dictatorial ambitions, if only to survive.

Iran’s Fars News Agency claimed that there have been no direct, or even indirect communications between Tehran and Washington. Fars also said “Trump backed down on targeting Iran’s power plants after Iran warned it would target power plants across West Asia in response”. Iran’s Tasnim News Agency confirmed that no negotiations are under way with the United States.

Now we are in a quandary. Who are we to believe? A leader of a theocratic, corrupt, authoritarian regime (I mean Iran, of course) or, well, the leader of our own theocratic, corrupt, authoritarian regime? My money is on Trump, if only because, when asked with whom in Iran he was negotiating, his answer was “a tip-top person”. Also, why did he post the “annihilation” message on Truth Social on Sunday, referred to above, if negotiations were in progress. He also is supposed to have accepted a valuable gift from Iran while Iran was under heavy bombing.

Every word Trump has uttered after declaring an illegal war against Iran has been a lie. Now he’s trying to pass the buck to Secretary of War, Pete Hegseth and Joint Chief of Staff, “Raizin” Cane, for “persuading” him to wage war against Iran. A war entirely of his own making, perhaps with a little push from Netanyahu, the war criminal who has been responsible for all the violence in the Middle East during the past few years, who has been dreaming of a war against Iran for decades,

There is no real hope that this war will end in the near future. Remember that the last illegal war to promote US and Israeli interests against Iraq took eight years for the greatest army the world has ever seen to retreat, with the loss of 4,600 lives and trillions in losses of infrastructure. Somehow, even though Iraq had nothing to do with 9/11, Americans, in their grief and anger at the worst terrorist attack on their shores, needed someone on whom they could wreak revenge. They gave Bush their full support at the start, although they were killing the wrong terrorist and causing chaos in the wrong country.

Trump does not have that luxury. Americans in a large majority, Republicans, Democrats and Independents, are all against this unnecessary Iran war with neither reason nor anything but a tragic end, with the loss of millions of lives and devastation of property.

Trump will see evidence of his disapproval of the people with the largest protests in the nation’s history. Officially titled as The No Kings Protests, with thousands of scheduled events across all 50 states, in major cities as well as in rural suburban areas. It is estimated that more than 3,000 local events have been planned, bringing together millions of people in one of the largest days of political organization in the nation’s history. These protests will show not only Americans disapproval of another unnecessary war with no end in sight, but with the economy reaching recession levels, with inflation out of control and gas and consumer goods rising daily. Americans are also incensed at the administration’s Draconian immigration policies, with Americans arrested and imprisoned without due process, even two American peaceful protesters murdered by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) for no reason whatsoever.

Hopefully, Saturday’s No Kings nationwide protests will at last turn the tide, but violence by Trump’s white supremacist base may be inevitable, before the United States resumes its destined path to democracy.

LESSONS FROM MY CAREER: SYNTHESISING MANAGEMENT THEORY WITH PRACTICE – PART 34

Internal conflicts in SLFP under MR presidency and crossovers from UNP

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.