First Capital Treasuries strengthens Board

From left: Dudeepa Ratwatte, Channa de Silva and Niran Mahawatte

First Capital Treasuries PLC has strengthened its Board with the appointment of Channa de Silva as Chairman.

The Board’s capabilities have also been further enhanced with the appointments of Dudeepa Ratwatte and Niran Mahawatte as Independent Non-Executive Directors.

The appointments bring extensive experience across capital markets, treasury, financial markets, risk management, and corporate leadership, amplifying the Board’s ability as First Capital Treasuries elevates its standing in Sri Lanka’s capital markets.

Commenting on the appointments, Manjula Mathews, Chairperson of First Capital Treasuries PLC said, “The appointments of Channa, Dudeepa, and Niran broaden First Capital Treasuries’ operations with a range of skills and expertise. Their combined experience will provide valuable perspective as the Company continues to pursue its strategic priorities and build long-term value for its stakeholders.”

Advancing from his position as Independent Non-Executive Director to Chairman, Channa de Silva’s expertise blends extensive proficiency and exposure from across Sri Lanka’s capital markets and its financial services sector.

Dudeepa Ratwatte’s two decades of comprehensive knowledge and professional exposure spans treasury, asset and liability management, financial markets, and risk management across Sri Lanka and Australia. His career also includes senior treasury and global markets roles at ABN AMRO, Commercial Bank of Ceylon, and Hatton National Bank, as well as leadership roles in funds management and ALM in Australia. He also has a robust command of multiple fields including derivatives, foreign exchange, and interest rate risk management.

Niran Mahawatte brings over 30 years of experience across banking, treasury, financial markets, and risk management. He served as Vice President/Head of Treasury at National Development Bank PLC for more than 17 years, holding responsibility over foreign exchange, debt markets, liquidity, funding, and market risk. His prior experience includes senior roles in treasury and global markets at Deutsche Bank and Commercial Bank of Ceylon.

Following these appointments, the Board of First Capital Treasuries PLC comprises Channa de Silva, Chairman and Independent Non-Executive Director; Sachith Perera, Chief Executive Officer and Non-Independent Executive Director; Manjula Mathews, Dilshan Wirasekara, and Minette Perera, Non-Independent Non-Executive Directors; Dr. Nishan de Mel, Cilani Wijesinghe, Dudeepa Ratwatte and Niran Mahawatte, Independent Non-Executive Directors.