David Pieris group kicks off Batticaloa Social Empowerment Drive

Reinforcing its longstanding commitment to community development and inclusive social progress, the David Pieris group launched its Social Empowerment Drive – Batticaloa, a comprehensive five-day community outreach initiative, from July 15 to 19, 2026.

The programme is centred on the David Pieris Motor Company (DPMC) land on Trincomalee Road, Batticaloa, with selected activities taking place at other locations across the city.

Designed as a holistic community empowerment initiative, the programme brings together a diverse range of activities aimed at supporting entrepreneurship, enhancing road safety awareness, promoting vocational and technical skills, school and university assistance programme, empowering women and youth and strengthening community engagement.

One of the key attractions of the programme is the five-day Trade Fair, until July 19, on the DPMC land. The visitors have the opportunity to explore products, services, live demonstrations, interactive experiences and exclusive promotional offers from several companies of the David Pieris group, including David Pieris Motor Company, Assetline Finance, David Pieris Automobiles, David Pieris e-Mobility, David Pieris Solar Energy, David Pieris Logistics, Assetline Insurance Brokers, David Pieris Leisure and David Pieris Aviation.

The Beauty and Personal Care Skills Development Programme for Women is conducted on the DPMC land to empower the women by providing practical knowledge and skills in the beauty and personal care industry while encouraging self-employment opportunities.

An Entrepreneurship Development Programme was conducted at East Lagoon Hotel on July 15, 2026, providing the aspiring entrepreneurs and small business owners with valuable knowledge and practical guidance to strengthen and expand their businesses.

On July 16, a Traffic Awareness Programme was held in front of the DPMC land on Trincomalee Road, aiming to educate students on responsible road behaviour and safe commuting practices.

July 18 was celebrated as Bajaj Day, featuring two specialised programmes on the DPMC premises.

A Traffic Awareness Programme for Three-Wheeler Drivers focused on promoting safer driving practices and responsible road use, while the Local Garage Training Programme provided technical knowledge and practical guidance to independent garage owners and technicians, enabling them to enhance their professional skills and service standards.

The final day of the programme, July 19, features a Cricket Tournament at the Sivananda School Ground, New Kalmunai Road, Kallady and football tournament at the KV Ground, Valachchenai, promoting sportsmanship, teamwork and community participation. Simultaneously, a Mechanical Training Programme for the DPMC service dealers is conducted on the DPMC land to further strengthen the technical competencies of the company’s service network.