SLIIT Int’l-Liverpool John Moores University inaugurate learning facility in Colombo

Panel discussion on ‘Beyond Borders: The Role of British Higher Education in Developing Globally Competitive Graduates’ featuring SLIIT Computing Faculty Senior Lecturer Kavinga Yapa, Board Member Dr. Harsha Cabral, Vice-Chancellor, Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer Prof. Lalith Gamage, British Council Head of Education Sajeewa Meepage and Liverpool John Moores University Society and Culture Faculty Pro-Vice-Chancellor Prof. Timothy Nichol

From left: SLIIT Vice-Chancellor, Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer Prof. Lalith Gamage and Liverpool John Moores University Society and Culture Faculty Pro-Vice-Chancellor Prof. Timothy Nichol

The Sri Lanka Institute of Information Technology (SLIIT) and Liverpool John Moores University (LJMU), United Kingdom, recently inaugurated SLIIT International in collaboration with LJMU, a dedicated international learning facility located at No. 17, Dickmans Road, Colombo 4.

It marks a significant milestone in a partnership spanning more than a decade and reinforcing their commitment to providing the Sri Lankan students with access to internationally recognised UK higher education qualifications.

The grand opening ceremony was attended by British High Commissioner to Sri Lanka Andrew Patrick, who graced the occasion as the chief guest, alongside senior representatives from SLIIT, LJMU, the British Council, academia, industry and other stakeholders, marking the next chapter of the long-standing SLIIT-LJMU collaboration.

The new facility is particularly significant as Sri Lanka’s first academic facility dedicated exclusively to the delivery of LJMU degree programmes, reflecting the strength, maturity and long-term commitment of the partnership.

Over the past decade, the SLIIT–LJMU partnership has established a growing network of more than 1,500 alumni, while providing the Sri Lankan students with opportunities to gain internationally recognised UK qualifications locally.

The new dedicated facility has been designed to provide a world-class learning environment exclusively for the LJMU programmes, supporting future programme expansion, strengthening the student experience and creating opportunities for deeper academic collaboration, innovation, research and student engagement.

SLIIT Vice-Chancellor, Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer Prof. Lalith Gamage stated, “The launch of SLIIT International in collaboration with LJMU represents an important new chapter in our long-standing partnership with LJMU. Our vision is to provide the Sri Lankan students with a world-class education and student experience right here in Sri Lanka, while equipping them with the global outlook, critical thinking, professional capabilities and career readiness required to succeed in an increasingly interconnected world. This dedicated facility strengthens the student experience while providing a strong foundation for the continued growth of our collaboration with LJMU.”

LJMU Society and Culture Faculty Pro-Vice-Chancellor Prof. Timothy Nichol said, “The opening of Sri Lanka’s first facility dedicated exclusively to LJMU degree programmes represents a significant milestone for the university and our partnership with SLIIT. It reflects the strength of our collaboration and our shared commitment to delivering a high-quality LJMU educational experience in Sri Lanka. The new facility also creates exciting opportunities for deeper academic collaboration, innovation, research and student engagement as we look towards the next phase of our partnership.”

A key highlight of the grand opening ceremony was the panel discussion titled ‘Beyond Borders: The Role of British Higher Education in Developing Globally Competitive Graduates’. The discussion examined the growth of international educational opportunities in Sri Lanka, future expansion of UK degree programmes, maintaining the quality and integrity of UK qualifications, developing future-ready graduates with global competencies and role of international higher education in strengthening graduate employability.