Telesonic puts Sri Lanka on global map

Telesonic Lanka Managing Director Arun Mahtani (right) with the award

Midea, the world’s largest producer of consumer appliances and the global leader in air treatment, recognised Sri Lanka’s Telesonic with the first-ever Sustainability Pioneer Award at its prestigious Global Strategic Partner Summit held in China.

The three-day global summit for Midea’s world-leading Residential Air Conditioning directorate brought together over 500 of Midea’s leading partners from around the world, marking a landmark moment as Telesonic stood tall among global industry giants to earn this pioneering accolade. The recognition placed Sri Lanka firmly in the international spotlight for sustainability and innovation in the air-conditioning sector as Telesonic’s far-reaching sustainable eco systems restoration and rural empowerment mission was awarded over other sustainability initiatives spanning the globe.

Receiving the award on behalf of Telesonic, Managing Director Arun Mahtani described the honor as “an incomparable feeling - to be awarded as a pathfinder and receive Midea’s first-ever Sustainability Pioneer Award.”

Mahtani added, “Climate change, identified by the UN as the world’s greatest crisis, demands genuine action. For an air-cooling company, taking climate action is both a duty and a privilege. That’s why years ago, we established two workshops - one that made us Sri Lanka’s No.1, and another that made us green.

Telesonic’s long-term environmental vision, initiated five years ago, seamlessly aligns with Midea’s global “Green Vision, Blue Future” platform, a comprehensive strategy that integrates sustainability across design, sourcing, manufacturing, logistics, recycling, and service.

Telesonic’s reforestation initiatives have already seen over 75,000 trees planted and an additional 50,000 nurtured annually through its eco-restoration nursery in Buttala, stocking up more than 50 native species to preserve biodiversity and ecosystem balance.  The sustainability mission works closely with families off the beaten-track, as well as, government and non-profit institutions, ensuring sustainability and bio diversity conservation.

The planet is warming alarmingly and climate change is threatening our existence. So we know all too well that just as a business’ primary goal is to make profits, as a responsible corporate citizen, it is also our bounden duty to help create a safer, cooler world for everyone. This award will spur us on, avers Mahtani.

Midea’s “Green Vision, Blue Future” strategy underscores its commitment to a low-carbon future through energy-efficient products, smart-home integration, and sustainable operations. The initiative extends to innovative technologies such as the MHELIOS smart energy management system, which allows households to optimise energy use and even contribute to the power grid.

By integrating green principles into every stage of production and consumption, Midea aims to redefine what it means to “cool the world” - responsibly.

The Sustainability Pioneer Award marks a defining chapter in Sri Lanka’s corporate sustainability journey. Telesonic’s model of blending technological excellence with environmental restoration has not only elevated the brand but also demonstrated how developing nations can inspire global corporations toward climate-conscious growth.

As Mahtani concludes, “Reforestation and sustainability are long journeys. But with Midea’s support and shared vision, we’ll continue ensuring that when we say ‘We cool your world,’ it truly means a greener world for all.”