MeshGround announces ‘Weathering Grounds:’ A choreographic dance and movement residency for climate, care & justice

MeshGround (Sri Lanka), is proud to present Weathering Grounds, a hybrid choreographic research residency in collaboration with Alleyne Dance (UK) and ClimArts (UK/India).

Since its inception, MeshGround – a leading contemporary dance company and movement platform, has become a dynamic hub where dance transforms into a language for dialogue, activism, and critical inquiry. Founded by Umeshi Rajeendra and Shonaka Ranatunga, MeshGround’s creative work spans a range of groundbreaking performances that combine contemporary movement, live sound, poetry, and immersive staging.

MeshGround also operates as a training and research centre, their teaching philosophy emphasizes process over perfection, encouraging dancers to experiment across disciplines, from theatre and sound to environmental art and social inquiry. In doing so, MeshGround reimagines dance as both deeply personal and profoundly communal.

Unthread – Choreographed by Umeshi Rajeendra and captured by Shameem Ismail, this performanceinvites audiences to confront our entanglements with the world’s social, political, and environmental affairsthrough movement.

The Weathering Grounds residency is another initiative that typifies MeshGround’s passion for nurturing the next generation of movement artists in Sri Lanka. The residency invites choreographers, dancers, and performance and movement artists based in Sri Lanka to take part in an immersive creative programme exploring how movement, dance, and performance can embody solutions, resilience, care, and justice in a rapidly changing world.

“Weathering Grounds is a space to explore that through creativity, collaboration, and care – where movement becomes a language for resilience and reimagination” explains Umeshi Rajeendra, Co-Founder and Artistic Director of MeshGround. “We’re inviting artists to respond to one of the most urgent questions of our time – how can our bodies, our art, and our movement become part of the solution?”

Weathering Grounds combines an online lab (January 9–12, 2026) and an in-person intensive in Colombo (January 24–31, 2026). Participants will engage in workshops, collaborative experiments, and choreographic research, guided by international and local facilitators. Speaking about the collaboration which brings together artists from Sri Lanka and the UK, Neelambaree Prasad, Founder of ClimArts details how participants will “Work together on stories of post-conflict and climate change. Through the residency, participants will be upskilled to harness the potency of art as a powerful medium of communicating climate solutions.”

Sade 140 – Descalzinha Danza Workshop by Alleyne Dance, beautifullycaptured by Irene Vázquez/Pedro Núñez, showcasing explorations inmovement and creative practice.

Worldwide Week of Italian Cuisine returns to Colombo for 10th edition

Sri Lanka’s financial watchdog sniffs out dirty money, but luxury car splurges slip through the net

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.