AIA provided urgent medical relief to flood-affected families in Thalwatta

AIA Insurance Lanka stepped forward with urgent humanitarian support for communities devastated by the recent floods, conducting a full-scale medical health camp in Thalwatta recently. The initiative delivered essential healthcare services to 600 families, reaffirming AIA’s commitment to helping Sri Lankans live Healthier, Longer, Better Lives—especially in moments of crisis, an AIA news release said.

“The health camp brought together a team of 10 doctors, trained nurses, and professional pharmacists, as well as AIA volunteers to deliver much-needed medical services to residents who had been affected by the floods”, it said.

“To ensure immediate care, AIA set up a fully operational on-site pharmacy counter, enabling residents to receive prescribed medication free of charge. Families were also provided medicine for diagnosed post-flood illnesses. Nursing teams carried out wound dressings and first-aid treatments on location, addressing urgent health concerns without delay.”

Doctors reported that most cases involved respiratory tract infections, bronchial cough, and asthma. They also treated wounds and skin infections caused by the flood, including cellulitis, as well as body aches and injuries. Vitamin deficiencies were addressed to help boost immunity.

Speaking about the initiative, Chathuri Munaweera, Director/CEO of AIA Sri Lanka, said: “The floods brought immense challenges to families in Thalwatta, and we wanted to stand beside them not just with words, but with meaningful action. It was so heartening to see our AIA volunteers gather in force to help support this initiative. Our purpose of helping people live ‘healthier, longer, better lives’ becomes most powerful when we show up in time for communities when they need us the most.”

This was the firsts initiative held under the ‘AIA Divimagata Piyapath’ programme which will continue to provide relief to those affected by the crisis, across Sri Lanka, with many more such camps planned in most affected areas.

eChannelling introduces ‘eHomecare’ as SL’s first doctor-led elderly care service

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.