Chinese FM Yi expresses optimism Sri Lanka is on right path to progress

Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath conveys agreement related to SINOPEC Oil Refinery Project in Hambantota will be finalised in Q1 2026

Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Minister Vijitha Herath yesterday held productive discussions with his Chinese counterpart Wang Yi during the latter’s brief visit to Sri Lanka.

The meeting aimed at further strengthening bilateral engagement and advancing the Strategic Cooperative Partnership between the two countries. Both Ministers reaffirmed the longstanding friendship and time-tested cooperation between Sri Lanka and China rooted in centuries of exchanges and consolidated since the establishment of diplomatic relations seven decades ago. The discussion also focused on enhancing partnership in the areas of trade, investment, development cooperation and tourism.

Minister Herath extended deep appreciation to the Government and the people of China for the steadfast support extended to Sri Lanka following cyclone Ditwah and requested further support for the second phase of resettlement, relocation and rebuilding, particularly for the restoration of affected infrastructure including identified roads, railways and bridges that are vital to connectivity, economic recovery and daily lives of people. Minister Wang assured China’s fullest support for this initiative and expressed confidence that

Sri Lanka will continue its rapid recovery under the leadership of President Anura Kumara Dissanayaka. He also welcomed the people-centric policies of the Government and expressed optimism that Sri Lanka is on the right path toward fulfilling aspirations of its people.

Minister Herath expressed appreciation for China’s constructive role in international fora and reiterated Sri Lanka’s firm commitment to the One China Policy and China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Both Ministers also recalled the successful high level exchanges in the recent past, including visits of the President and the Prime Minister of Sri Lanka to China in 2025.

During the meeting, Minister Herath conveyed that the Agreement related to the SINOPEC Oil Refinery Project in Hambantota will be finalised in the 1st quarter of 2026. Both sides also agreed to jointly commemorate the 70th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries in the year 2027.

Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs the People’s Republic of China Miao Deyu, Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China to Sri Lanka Qi Zhenhong and Secretary to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Aruni Ranaraja were associated with the