JJ Twins … plenty to shout about

Julian and Jason, better known in the music scene as JJ Twins, are a Sri Lankan-born musical duo, currently performing in the Maldives, and they have achieved much as a duo.

In fact, they started their musical journey in 2012, but they found it challenging to pursue their passion for English music in Sri Lanka, where the local music scene tends to favour different genres. As a result, they relocated to the Maldives to further their music career.

They perform six nights a week in the Maldives, showcasing their musical talents to enthusiastic audiences, and their music style resonates with audiences beyond the Maldives.

Their music is a blend of pop and R&B, characterised by harmonious duets and guitar-driven melodies. They write their own songs, often focusing on themes of love.

Julian and Jason have just released their new album CONCLUDED — a seven-track journey inspired by real-life experiences of hurt, betrayal, and heartbreak. Each song they say, tells a true story from a past relationship, reflecting the pain and growth that came with them.

“Our message to anyone listening: no matter what you’re going through, healing is possible. Pain doesn’t last forever — there’s hope, and there’s light on the other side.”

The seven tracks on the album are: ‘To The One I Used To Love,’ ‘You Left Me Here To Die,’ ‘Can’t Get You Off My Mind,’ ‘Heartless,’ ‘I Forgive You,’ ‘Do You Understand?’ and ‘It’s All Over Now.’

The album is available on all music streaming platforms: Spotify, Apple Music, YouTube Music and YouTube, and on all their social media platforms, such as Instagram, Facebook and TikTok.

JJ Twins have released multiple EPs and albums and singles, with two songs ‘All I Want Is You This Christmas ‘ hitting number one on the YES Homegrown Top 15 Charts, and ‘ Home For Christmas’ making it to number five.

Token of appreciation from the PastPupils of All Saint’s College, Borella,for performing at their concert

They also collaborated with an international Maldivian Hip Hop group, Symbolic Records, on a song titled ‘Attracted To You, ‘ and recently worked with an international Indonesian rapper Bonerutzy on ‘Higher’.

You can watch the official ‘Higher’music video, shot in Malang, Indonesia, on their YouTube channel.

Following their collaboration with Bonerutzy, they did their first international music tour ‘ HIGHER TOUR ‘ in Indonesia, covering three cities – Jakarta, Bali and Malang.

They also got the opportunity to be the opening act for Indonesia’s legendary reggae group Souljah, and they were the only international artiste to be featured on the list amongst other local artistes.

Their future plans, they say, include two collaborations with two great singers from Jakarta, Indonesia – a female and male artiste, Deifydee and Phaet S.

The two songs are set to be released early next year, with music videos for both songs being shot in Jakarta, Indonesia.

What’s more, JJ Twins have also launched their very own clothing brand ‘Kokonut’ – high quality oversize T-shirts, they say.

Survival of the fittest? The importance of context-sensitivity in education reform

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.