SLT-MOBITEL partners MegaPay powering seamless eSIM onboarding

Mobitel Ltd. Chief Operating Officer Sudharshana Geeganage, exchanging the MOU with Pay&Go General Director Vardan Aslibekyan, accompanied by Head -  Operations and Customer Support Gayan Chandrarathne, and  Head -  Business Development Denver Fernando, from Pay&Go, and General Manager- New Market Development Rukshan De Silva, Assistant Manager- New Market Development, Melan Wijesekara Arachchige, from Mobitel.

In a strategic move to shape Sri Lanka’s digital future, SLT-MOBITEL has partnered with MegaPay (Pay&Go), further enhancing its nationwide value proposition to empower Sri Lankans to connect to the digital world through the eSIM onboarding service.

The joint endeavour enables Sri Lankans in both urban and rural areas to instantly connect through Mobitel’s next generation eSIM connectivity now available through 1,000+ Pay&Go kiosks island wide, through the Pay & Go App and online services.

The partnership further strengthens SLT-MOBITEL’s mission to enable frictionless digital experiences, simplify digital access and expand customer reach. Through the Pay&Go ecosystem’s extensive footprint and 24/7 accessibility, Sri Lankan Mobile consumers can instantly onboard to Mobitel eSIM service and enjoy exclusive offers anytime, anywhere.

The partnership reflects SLT-MOBITEL’s journey to accelerate digital transformation throughout the country.

Present on the occasion were senior MegaPay representatives, including General Director Vardan Aslibekyan,Head of Operations and Customer Support Gayan Chandrarathne, and Head of Business Development Denver Fernando. Key personnel in attendance from Mobitel included  Chief Operating Officer Sudharshana Geeganage, Mobitel Ltd. General Manager - New Market Development Rukshan De Silva and  Assistant Manager- New Market Development Melan Wijesekara Arachchige.

The collaboration further enables customers who patronise Pay&Go services to make utility bill payments, and other services to obtain Mobitel eSIM connections by scanning QR codes available at over 1,000 Pay&Go kiosks located in high density areas, as well as via the Pay&Go mobile app and Pay&Go website, which together serve a monthly user base exceeding 600,000. The service is available 24/7, year-round ensuring uninterrupted connectivity for all users both local and overseas.

Being among the key architects of Sri Lanka’s digital future, SLT-MOBITEL continues to expand its reach through strategic partnerships to bridge technology and everyday life. With Sri Lanka’s eSIM market evolving, this launch positions SLT-MOBITEL to lead the charge in future-ready mobile experiences.

Since 2015, the two organisations have successfully collaborated on bill payments and reload services. The new phase of partnership builds on the existing foundation to usher in even greater value and reach, offering customers the liberty and convenience to connect to Mobitel eSIM service through MegaPay’s expansive footprint comprising over 1,000 kiosks in high-traffic locations and a combined monthly user base of over 600,000 in web, mobile, and kiosk platforms. The unparalleled access offers SLT-MOBITEL a clear pathway to digitally engaged consumers.