BYD opens 11th showroom in Negombo

BYD, the number one brand in the brand-new new energy vehicle (NEV) segment in Sri Lanka and the world’s leading NEV manufacturer, together with its authorised distributor in Sri Lanka, John Keells CG Auto (JKCG Auto), announced the opening of its 11th showroom in the country, further expanding its presence in the Western province.

Opening on September 11, the new BYD showroom, located at No 254, Chilaw Road, Negombo, joins a growing retail and service network that includes Colombo, Galle, Kurunegala, Kandy, Ampara and Rathnapura.

The latest launch further strengthens BYD’s presence along the Western province’s coastal belt, bringing its range of electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles closer to the customers in Negombo and surrounding areas, while strengthening the brand’s islandwide accessibility.

The customers around Negombo can expect the same level of reliable service, support and access to vehicles that BYD is known for across its existing network. The new location will initially operate as a showroom, with plans underway to develop the facility into a fully-fledged 3S facility, offering sales, service and spare parts under one roof. The showroom will feature a range of BYD vehicles including BYD SEALION 5, BYD SEALION 6, BYD SEALION 8, BYD ATTO 1, BYD ATTO 2, SHARK 6 and BYD DOLPHIN.

JKCG Auto Chief Executive Officer Charith Panditharatne stated, “Reaching our 11th showroom is a significant milestone for BYD in Sri Lanka. In a relatively short period, we have seen the market move from building awareness around NEVs to seeing them become a more familiar choice for Sri Lankan customers. Our focus now is on continuing to build the network and the support infrastructure around it, so that the customers can have the confidence to make the switch to new energy mobility wherever they are in the country.”

In line with its commitment to building a strong NEV ecosystem, Keells has deployed 43 chargers islandwide, BYD’s recently announced strategic partnership with GreenEV unlocks access to an additional 73 chargers, bringing the total public charging network to 116 chargers across all nine provinces of Sri Lanka.