Export earnings report $ 15.8 billion underscoring Sri Lanka’s trade competitiveness

Lanka’s export sector has continued its upward trajectory, recording a 5.8 % year-on-year (y-o-y) growth during the period from January to November, according to the Export Development Board.

Based on Sri Lanka Customs statistics and estimated export figures for Gems and Jewellery, Petroleum Products and services, total exports reached $ 15,776.36 million. In November alone, total exports, comprising both merchandise and services reached $ 1,364.52 million, reflecting a y-o-y growth of 5.56% over November 2024.

Commenting on this achievement, Export Development Board (EDB) Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer Mangala Wijesinghe stated that Sri Lanka’s export earnings during the January-November period reached $ 15,776.36 million, reflecting strong y-o-y growth.

He noted that this performance underscores the resilience and competitiveness of Sri Lanka’s export sector, supported by the recovery of key markets, sustained production capacity, and the effective implementation of export development strategies.

He further emphasised that the encouraging growth reflects Sri Lanka’s deeper integration into global trade and the continued focus on enhancing export competitiveness and market diversification, with exporters demonstrating resilience and innovation in navigating evolving global challenges.

He also highlighted that achieving over 86.3% of the annual export target by the end of November is a clear indication of the strength and commitment of Sri Lanka’s export community.

In November alone, merchandise exports grew by 5.95% y-o-y, reaching $ 1,053.22 million, according to provisional data of Sri Lanka Customs including the estimates for Gems and Jewellery and Petroleum Products. For the period January to November, merchandise exports totaled $ 12,417.98 million, reflecting a 6.41% increase compared to the same period in 2024.

In November, earnings from services exports were estimated to have increased by 4.27% to $ 311.3 million. Over the period of January to November, services exports were estimated to have increased by 3.63%, totaling $ 3,358.38 million.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.