Japan grants $ 447,432 for Northern Province demining

Japan has provided $ 447,432 (about Rs. 148 million) to support humanitarian demining in the Northern Province, the Embassy of Japan in Colombo said.

Japanese Ambassador Akio Isomata signed the grant contract on 29 September, 2026 with Skavita Humanitarian Assistance and Relief Project (SHARP) Program Manager Sarath Jayawardhana, under Japan’s Grant Assistance for Grassroots Projects (GGP) scheme.

The project, to be implemented by SHARP, is expected to clear more than 190,000 square metres of land of mines, allowing more than 7,000 people to return to their land and about 11,500 people in the surrounding areas to expand their economic activities. Japan has been a major donor for demining in Sri Lanka since 2002, with total assistance of over $ 50 million.

Expressing his deepest gratitude to SHARP for its untiring efforts in demining, Isomata said: “As a steadfast partner in Sri Lanka’s post-conflict recovery and reconciliation efforts, Japan has extended more than $ 50 million for various demining projects in Sri Lanka over nearly a quarter-century since 2002, that is, since even before the end of the civil war. Today’s signing is another testament to Japan’s commitment to continued assistance to the people of Sri Lanka, especially to those in the conflict-affected areas.”

Referring to his most recent visit to the Northern Province, where he met people from various communities and backgrounds, Isomata said: “I would also like to call upon all the stakeholders, including the Government of Sri Lanka, to reach out further beyond the existing donors and broaden its circle of support by engaging civil society, the private sector and the diaspora, to accelerate demining activities as well as other initiatives for the development of the Northern and Eastern Provinces at a greater scale. Needless to say, for the sustainable development of the entire nation, we need to strengthen a holistic approach to bridge the regional gaps in economic development in the country.”

Jayawardhana said: “SHARP is very grateful and deeply indebted to the Japanese Embassy in Sri Lanka for having provided the initial funds through GGP Japan in 2016 for SHARP to commence demining operations, and very much appreciates Japan having been the sole funder of SHARP from 2016 to 2021, and thereafter continuing to be the major donor of SHARP from 2022 onwards.”