China ready to work with Sri Lanka to build strategic trust: Chinese Ambassador

Colombo, July 22 (Daily Mirror) - Military cooperation between China and Sri Lanka has been further deepened in multiple fields in recent years, covering defense consultations, personnel training, equipment and technical exchanges, Chinese Ambassador to Sri Lanka Qi Zhenhong said.

Addressing an event to mark the 99th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA), he said the military-to-military relations between China and Sri Lanka are battle-tested.

“In the aftermath of Cyclone Ditwah, China provided the Sri Lankan Ministry of Defence with supplies valued at 10 million RMB. As always, China stands ready to work with Sri Lanka to build strategic trust and continue to firmly support each other,” he said.

On the occasion of the 99th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese People's Liberation Army(PLA), on behalf of the Chinese Embassy in Sri Lanka, I would like to pay my highest respects to the glorious PLA and express my heartfelt gratitude to all friends who have cared for and supported China's national defense and military modernization!

This year marks the 105th anniversary of the founding of the Communist Party of China, as well as the 90th anniversary of the victory of the Long March, and the opening year of the 15th Five-Year Plan. Looking back on China's remarkable achievements, the most fundamental guarantee is the strong leadership of the Communist Party of China. Entering the new era, under the guidance of President Xi Jinping's thought on strengthening the military,  the PLA upgrades military equipment, optimizes troop structure and enhances overall combat capabilities to safeguard national security and global peace.

The global landscape is undergoing profound changes, and hegemonism and power politics continue to prevail. The international community faces the danger of a return to “the law of the jungle”.China stands ready to work with all nations to firmly uphold the UN-centered international system, the international order based on international law, and the basic norms governing international relations based on the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, while steadfastly practicing true multi-lateralism. China pursues external relations based on the principles of non-alignment, non-confrontation and not targeting any third party, and remains an important force for upholding international fairness and justice.

The Chinese military has actively participated in UN peacekeeping operations, international counter-terrorism cooperation, and counter-piracy escort missions, providing an increasing amount of international public goods and demonstrating the responsibility and commitment as a major country. The stronger China grows, the more peaceful the world becomes; the more China develops, the more prosperous the world gets.

The military-to-military relations between China and Sri Lanka are battle-tested. In recent years, military cooperation has been further deepened in multiple fields, covering defense consultations, personnel training, equipment and technical exchanges, etc. In the aftermath of Cyclone Ditwah, China provided the Sri Lankan Ministry of Defence with supplies valued at 10 million RMB. As always, China stands ready to work with Sri Lanka to build strategic trust and continue to firmly support each other.

Building on past achievements, we will strive for even greater success. My colleagues and I will continue to make greater contributions to China-Sri Lanka friendship.