CEAT Kelani celebrates dealer excellence with memorable tours to Singapore and Thailand

Top-performing CEAT Kelani dealers were rewarded with all-expenses-paid tours to Singapore and Thailand recently, as Sri Lanka’s leading tyre brand celebrated exceptional sales achievements with a fusion of business recognition and world-class leisure under its 2025 “Travel with CEAT” rewards programme.

The tours were part of a three-tier incentive scheme designed to honour outstanding achievement at an eight-month sales campaign that challenged CEAT dealers to surpass ambitious growth targets in the Truck, Light Truck and Radial tyre categories. Participants who met and exceeded threshold volumes, calculated above their previous six-month average performance, earned their place in one of three coveted rewards tiers.

Those in the top tier will embark on an exclusive tour to Switzerland, while the second and third tiers have already experienced memorable visits to Singapore and Thailand, blending relaxation, adventure and cultural discovery with well-deserved recognition of their professional success.

The five-day Singapore tour, comprised a four-day voyage aboard the Genting Dream – one of Asia’s most luxurious cruise liners – and a day exploring the cosmopolitan city. Dealers experienced the height of ocean-going leisure on board a ship that boasts 18 decks, over 35 restaurants and bars, live entertainment at the Zodiac Theatre, and family attractions such as pools, waterslides and beach club parties. The highlight of the itinerary was a stop at Phuket Island in Thailand, where participants disembarked to explore the island’s beaches, markets and cuisine.

The Thailand leg of the programme treated the group to a four-day stay in Pattaya and Bangkok, featuring a cruise dinner along the Chao Phraya River aboard the Chao Phraya Princess. Against the glittering backdrop of Bangkok’s skyline and landmarks such as the Grand Palace and Wat Arun, guests dined on Thai and international cuisine accompanied by live music and cultural performances.

Richard Pieris Finance records Rs. 292 million Profit Before Taxes in first half of 2025/26

‘The producer behind your favorite hits is back and this time, he’s here for the underdogs’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.