Health sector ills

The state health sector is perennially ill, and the people are sick of it, so to speak. Nary a day passes without a strike or a protest staged by one category of health workers or another. Doctors are up in arms again. The Government Medical Officers’ Association (GMOA) has been complaining of irregularities in doctors’ transfers due to administrative or political interference. It decided to stage a countrywide token strike yesterday in protest against an alleged government move to implement doctors’ transfers arbitrarily, but it walked back its decision, following a discussion with Minister of Health Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa and some Healthy Ministry officials on Thursday night.

These are hard times. Most people are struggling to make ends meet, and cannot afford private healthcare. They are dependent on state-run hospitals, which are experiencing drug shortages and inordinate delays due to resource constraints. Complaints abound that patients who visit government hospitals have to buy medicines from private pharmacies. A doctors’ strike will make their plight even more intolerable.

Governments refuse to grant doctors’ demands and opt for a game of chicken, driving the GMOA to strike or threaten to do so, and eventually politicians and bureaucrats give in after causing untold suffering to patients. The current dispensation is no exception. It is moving along the same rut as its predecessors in handling strikes in the health sector and elsewhere. Thankfully, sanity prevailed at long last, and the government swallowed its pride and opted to have a discussion with the protesting doctors.

The GMOA said in a media statement that an agreement had been reached at its discussion with the Health Minister to suspend the transfers of doctors that the Ministry of Health had attempted to implement in violation of established procedure, and instead carry out the transfers in a proper manner without delay. Why couldn’t the government sort out the issue that led to the trade union dispute before the GMOA threatened a strike? It also provoked the CEB (Ceylon Electricity Board) workers into resorting to trade union action, which lasted for weeks, before having negotiations with the warring unions. The issue of restructuring the CEB is far from resolved, but there is a fragile truce between the trade unions and the government, which is apparently emulating the JRJ regime in dealing with workers. However, there is now some space for more talks.

In the health sector, it is not the interests of patients that prevail. They are subjugated to those of health workers and politicians in power. Doctors are not without blame for this sorry state of affairs. They are accused of leveraging their trade union power to have their own way. But it defies comprehension why the Health Ministry cannot handle a matter like doctors’ transfers without creating issues that provoke the GMOA into protesting or even striking. The government must consult all stakeholders before carrying out transfers. Let it be urged to adopt a conciliatory approach instead of trying to bulldoze its way through. The fact that it has secured a supermajority does not mean it is free to act according to its whims and fancies. The JVP used its trade union might to facilitate its rise to power. Unnecessary battles with trade unions have the potential to be the undoing of the JVP-led government.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.