BASL expresses concern over President AKD’s statement at May Day Rally

The Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) yesterday expressed concern over President Anura Kumara Dissanayake’s statement at last week’s May Day rally.

In a statement the BASL said an independent judiciary stands as the bedrock of a vibrant and enduring democracy, safeguarding the rule of law and ensuring that justice prevails without fear or favour.

In a statement BASL said the Preamble of the Constitution of the Republic provides that the independence of the judiciary as being part of the intangible heritage that guarantees the dignity and well-being of succeeding generations of the People of Sri Lanka.

Article 111 C (1) of the Constitution further provides that “Every judge, presiding officer, public officer or other person entrusted by law with judicial powers or functions or with functions … shall exercise and perform such powers and functions without being subject to any direction or other interference proceeding from any other person except a superior court, tribunal, institution or other person entitled under law to direct or supervise such judge, presiding officer, public officer or such other person in the exercise or performance of such powers or functions”. Article 111 C (2) of the Constitution further makes such acts an offence.

Judicial independence is not merely an institutional safeguard, it is fundamental to preserving the dignity of the individual, upholding the rule of law, and sustaining the moral authority of a democratic society.

“It is in this light that we express grave concern at the statement made by the President at the recent May Day Rally referring to a Judicial decision due to be delivered on 25 May 2026 stating that the audience would be able to applaud the decision when delivered. The tenor of the statement is open to the suggestion that there is interference with the judicial process and as such the BASL apprehends that the statement may erode public confidence in the Judiciary,” the statement emphasised.

“In the past, whenever the independence of the judiciary has been under threat, whether it be from the executive arm or any other quarter, the BASL and its members throughout the island have fiercely opposed such interferences. The BASL is committed to ensure that the independence and integrity of the judiciary is at all times protected and safeguarded and will take all necessary steps towards that end and will continue to do so in the interests of democracy, the rule of law and the need to protect and safeguard the Constitution,” it added.