Sri Lanka tourism reset targets reforms, investment and promotion

Sri Lanka tourism yesterday launched two World Bank-supported consultancy assignments to develop a national tourism strategy and global promotional campaign road map, as the country seeks to attract higher-spending visitors and generate greater economic returns from the sector.

The National Tourism Strategic Planning Consultancy for 2026-2031 will prepare a five-year framework covering tourism demand and supply, investment requirements, regulatory and institutional reforms, skills development, marketing and implementation.

The assignment was awarded to a joint venture between Spain’s Aninver Development Partners and Sri Lanka’s EML Consultants PLC.

A separate Global Destination Communication Campaign Road Map Consultancy will develop a five-year international promotional strategy using market intelligence, destination analysis and global benchmarks. It was awarded to US-based Skift Inc. and Sri Lanka’s MTI Consulting.

Both assignments, launched yesterday, are supported by the World Bank’s Grant Facility for Project Preparation.

Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Deputy Minister Prof. Ruwan Ranasinghe said the initiatives should help shift Sri Lanka away from pursuing the visitor numbers alone.

“We are no longer interested only in volumes. We are a small island nation with sensitive ecological settings, a small population and fragile cultural practices and heritage,” he said.

“For an island of this size and type, I think five million tourists would be the maximum. Now, however, we need to focus on value.”

The national strategy will identify tourism products, growth opportunities and investment needs across the country. It will also include a skills-gap assessment, curriculum review and modernisation plan for the Sri Lanka Institute of Tourism and Hotel Management, alongside improvements to the digital and tourism data systems. The promotional roadmap will seek to sharpen Sri Lanka’s destination positioning, diversify source markets and develop targeted campaigns for the higher-spending visitor segments.

World Bank Lead Private Sector Specialist for South Asia Natasha Kapil said better data would be critical as Sri Lanka’s tourism markets evolve.

“We have witnessed a major shift in the types of tourists arriving on the island,” she said.

“Once we have gathered and analysed more intelligence and data, we will be able to develop much more targeted marketing approaches for the higher-spending visitor segments in Colombo and the other major tourism areas.”

The assignments will complement the World Bank’s wider tourism programme, including the proposed US $ 77 million Thrive Colombo operation, which aims to position the commercial capital as a 48-to-72-hour regional getaway.

Prof. Ranasinghe urged the consultants and authorities to ensure the recommendations are implemented.

“We do not need just another report. We already have hundreds of them,” he said.

“We need to implement these proposals on the ground and begin delivering results.”