Rohana Bandara Weerakoon, assumes duty as Actg. General Manager/CEO of NSB

Rohana Bandara Weerakoon, a veteran banker and administrator, has assumed duties as the Actg. General Manager/CEO of National Savings Bank (NSB) , amidst religious blessings, at a simple ceremony, held in accordance with the regulations, pertaining to the current situation, prevailing in the country.

Weerakoon, who is in possession of a wealth of experience, unfolding over 28 years in the Banking and Financial Sector, had been serving in the capacity of Deputy General Manager (HRD) of the Bank, prior to his appointment as the Actg. General Manager/CEO.

The Chairman of National Savings Bank, President’s Counsel, Dr. Harsha Cabral, Dushyanta Basnayake , and Supul Wijesinghe, Board of Directors , and a few other distinguished guests graced the occasion , while the Corporate Management of the Bank and representatives of the Trade Unions were also present at the event.

Having joined the Bank in the year 1998, Weerakoon has served in many positions at various levels of the Bank. By gaining deep and broad-based expertise and holding several important management level positions across treasury operations, primary dealer function, branch operations, administration and human resource development, he was able to reach the zenith in no time.

Addressing the gathering the Chairman of National Savings Bank, President’s Counsel, Dr. Harsha Cabral, observed that not only individually but also as a country and globally, we are currently facing a difficult time and NSB has been blessed with a leader who can steer the Bank amidst troubled waters. Therefore, he correctly emphasized the need of the hour to survive the troubled times as a team in unison.

The new Actg.GM/CEO holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Commerce (B.COM) from the University of Kelaniya and a Master’s Degree in Business Administration (MBA) from the Postgraduate Institute of Management (PIM), University of Sri Jayewardenepura. He is also a Fellow Member of the Association of Professional Bankers of Sri Lanka (APB) and the Institute of Chartered Professional Managers of Sri Lanka (FCPM). With his outgoing personality, he always gained confidence of the staff and his past Presidency at the Executive Officers’ Association bears testimony to the same.

Bandara Weerakoon, while addressing the gathering, noted that his appointment as the Actg.GM/CEO should not be seen as a personal achievement, but an accomplishment of the Bank, made especially at a challenging era and affirmed his highest commitment in fulfilling the given mandate while inviting the fullest cooperation of the NSB team. His strong operational acumen, strategic insight, proven leadership qualities and capabilities blended with thoughtful, composed and considerate human approach are instrumental in guiding the current transitional phase of the Bank and supporting its long-term growth and stability. (nsb)

DFCC Aloka partners with Chrysalis to strengthen women-led enterprises across Sri Lanka

Revolutionary shift with the introduction of Certified Recycled Plastics in FMCG packaging

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.