HNB Life opens Kandana branch

HNB Life marked another significant milestone in its growth journey with the grand opening of its new branch in Kandana, further strengthening its presence across Sri Lanka.

With a vast network of physical and incubator branches islandwide, the company continues to enhance accessibility to life insurance solutions while bringing its services closer to the customers and communities across the country.

The opening of the Kandana branch comes at a defining moment for HNB Life, as the company celebrates its 25th anniversary and steps into a new chapter following its transformation from HNB Assurance to HNB Life.

Over the past five years, the advisor distribution channel has been a powerful force behind the company’s growth, consistently delivering an average new business premium growth of over 25 percent. Its momentum is further reflected in the growing strength and calibre of its advisor force, with 132 MDRT qualifiers in 2025, a remarkable 51 percent increase from the previous year. These achievements underscore the channel’s significant contribution to HNB Life’s growth and its expanding reach in taking life insurance closer to people across the country.

HNB Life Executive Director and Chief Executive Officer Lasitha Wimalaratne stated, “The opening of our Kandana branch is another important step in our journey to make life insurance more accessible to every Sri Lankan. As we celebrate 25 years of protecting lives and empowering dreams, expanding our footprint allows us to better serve our customers while strengthening our connection with communities across the country. Our growing branch network, together with our dedicated team of life planners, ensures that we remain close to our customers and are able to support them with solutions that truly meet their evolving needs.”

Executive Vice President and Chief Business Officer Advisor Distribution Harindra Ramasinghe stated, “Our expansion into Kandana reinforces our commitment to reaching more Sri Lankans with meaningful protection and financial planning solutions. Our advisors have evolved into Life Planners, reflecting a broader and more purposeful role in helping the customers navigate life’s milestones with confidence. Supported by a vast network of branches across the island and a highly committed sales force, we are continuing to create greater convenience and value for individuals and families across the island.”

The HNB Life Kandana branch is located at 339/A/2, Negombo Road, Nagoda, Kandana.