CDRI awards Rs. 142 m grant for UN-Habitat-Water Board project

CDRI Director – Advocacy and Communications David White (left) and UN-Habitat Country Program Manager for Sri Lanka Harshini Halangode handing over the project document to President Anura Kumara Disanayake

UN-Habitat, together with the National Water Supply and Drainage Board (NWSDB), has officially launched a new project in Sri Lanka titled ‘Safe and Resilient Water Supply for Western Cities – Integrating Climate Resilience into Water Safety Plans of the Ambatale Water Supply Scheme.’

This project is funded through a $ 469,232 (Rs. 142 million) grant from the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure’s (CDRI) trust fund, the Infrastructure Resilience Accelerator Fund (IRAF), with financial support from the Government of India.

The project was officially launched at Temple Trees, the Prime Minister’s Office, during the national World Habitat Day celebrations organised by the Urban Development, Construction and Housing Ministry.

The project document was officially handed over to President Anura Kumara Disanayake by CDRI Director – Advocacy and Communications David White and UN-Habitat Country Program Manager for Sri Lanka Harshini Halangode.

Urban Development, Construction and Housing Minister Anura Karunathilaka, Deputy Minister T.B. Sarath, Secretary Ranjith Ariyaratne, Indian High Commission in Sri Lanka First Secretary (Pol.) Navya Singla were also present at the ceremony.

This project aims to improve the catchment management capacities of urban local authorities in Colombo, Kotte, and Kelaniya and the early warning capacities of the NWSDB to increase the resilience of operations and maintenance of the Ambatale Water Supply Scheme, protecting it from climate change induced floods and droughts.

This project will support the NWSDB to align with Edition II of the World Health Organisation’s Water Safety Plan (WSP) Manual, enabling upscaling at a national level. The project will be jointly implemented by UN-Habitat and the NWSDB from 2025 to 2027.

White said: “We are pleased to support UN-Habitat and the NWSDB in driving Sri Lanka’s vital journey towards climate resilience. This project exemplifies the collaborative spirit and forward-thinking innovation that the CDRI is committed to championing on a global scale for urban resilience.”

Halangode said: “This project will protect over 2 million people in Greater Colombo who depend on the Ambatale Water Supply Scheme. Rising pollution, floods, and droughts threaten daily water supply, making this initiative essential for safe, reliable, and climate-resilient water for the city and surrounding areas.”