Digital technology to be integrated into schools: Deputy Minister

Colombo, Sep. 30 (Daily Mirror) - Digital technology will be integrated into the teaching-learning process, school administration and teacher transfer mechanisms, while policies will be formulated to ensure student safety in the digital space, Deputy Minister of Education and Higher Education Dr. Madhura Seneviratne said.

He made the remarks while participating in the foundation-laying ceremony for a new three-storey building with Advanced Level science laboratories at Kirimatiyana Buddhist Girls' National School on September 29.

The Deputy Minister said the Government's aim was to create school learning environments aligned with emerging global education trends in order to produce future-ready professionals and innovators.

The new Rs. 180 million building will comprise three modern laboratories and six classrooms and is expected to be completed within 10 months.

Dr. Seneviratne said 169 primary schools had been selected in 2026 to be developed in line with global education trends under the new education reforms.

He said the Government had also allocated funds to promote educational equity by ensuring a fair distribution of resources between urban and rural schools.

The Deputy Minister said vocational education subjects would be incorporated into the Advanced Level curriculum, while subjects aimed at developing students' innovative skills would also be introduced during school hours.

He also outlined the progress being made to fill teacher and principal vacancies and the curriculum reforms planned for National Colleges of Education.

Meanwhile, he said Rs. 420 million had been approved to construct a building at the Puttalam Study Centre of the Open University of Sri Lanka, which would provide learning facilities for around 1,200 students at a time.

Deputy Minister of Environment Anton Jayakody, who also attended the event, said the need to produce citizens with knowledge and discipline to build a developed society.

He said the Government had allocated Rs. 705 billion for education through the 2026 Budget, describing it as the largest allocation for education in recent history, with the aim of transforming Sri Lanka into an education hub in Asia.