Police Vs Lawyer? (Not Lawyers)

Mount Lavinia Courthouse Incident Shocking, shocking, shocking. Lawyer Gunarathna Wanninayake got his day when he was able to remand the Police Constable who asked him to move his vehicle that was parked/ moved/ obstructed, the place where the Prison bus was going to be parked. Semantics do not matter.

Wanninayake disgraced the entire Legal Fraternity. Not a single Lawyer came to the rescue of the hapless Police Constable. Not a single. Lawyers appear for Murderers, Rapists, Drug Lords, Child molesters, and even worse offenders. Of course, for a hefty fee. There was none for the Police Constable at the Mt Lavinia Magistrates Court. Shame, Shame.

Let us glean over the facts as we know. Let us assume that the Police Constable did throw a punch (we do not know that), but did the lawyer make a complaint to the Police? Did he go to the Hospital and produce a medical report? No! Did the senior Police Officers who came to the scene act in a manner that was expected of them? Did they throw their brother officer under the Bus? For what gain? Small man Vs big wig? Shame, Shame.. This is the state of our Nation.

Let us assume a scenario. God forbid if that happens. Let us assume that some legal officer’s house is vandalised, broken into (it could be a bigger crime), and the Police Juniors refuse to investigate? The matter will not even come to Court. Huh? Let us assume that a legal officer’s neighbour’s house is burgled. The Police Constables visit the scene of the crime and arrest the culprits, and file action? Fiction, as it may seem, let it not escalate into such. Does the Law yet have a big man, small man bent?

The issue was (even if the Constable threw a punch) a simple misdemeanor. To remand a Police officer without an inquiry is to appease the legal fraternity. A serious lapse in judgement, is to say the least.

Let the Lawyer be held liable too for his offending and crass behaviour. Let good sense, nay, the proper application of law prevail. Why not remand the Lawyer too for a couple of days too, to balance the scale.