“I’m a Tiger but not an LTTE Tiger” - Archchuna

Colombo, September 17 (Daily Mirror) - Jaffna District MP Ramanathan Archchuna defended his use of the word “tiger”, saying he would not consider it an offence to identify himself with the animal, while denying that he had referred to a “Tiger diaspora”.

“If someone asks me whether I am a tiger, I accept it. My favourite animal is the tiger. Some people like elephants and some like snakes; I like tigers,” Archchuna said.

He said that he had never referred to an “LTTE diaspora” and rejected suggestions that his reference to a tiger indicated support for the LTTE.

“Even my personal mobile phone background image is a tiger. Sinhala people say they are lions. We never say that saying ‘lion’ is wrong,” he said.

Archchuna said he had only referred to the “diaspora” while explaining that the term included Sri Lankan Tamils, Muslims and Sinhalese living overseas.

“I never said the word ‘Tiger diaspora’. I only said diaspora. Our President may not understand English,” he said.

He said his reference was to funds received from Sri Lankans living overseas for the country’s rebuilding programme.

“The country received funds for rebuilding Sri Lanka. Those funds were received from the diaspora. That was why I said the government took money from the diaspora and is deceiving us,” he said.

Archchuna also questioned whether his comments could reasonably be interpreted as support for the LTTE.

“Do you think I use the LTTE tiger logo, join the LTTE and think about taking up weapons again? I am not like that,” he said.

The MP, who identified himself as a doctor, said he had served in hospitals including Kalubowila and Peradeniya and had treated Sinhala patients throughout his career.

“I have been a doctor for the past 40 years. If I represented the LTTE, I would not have been able to provide medicine to Sinhala people,” he said.

He also referred to former Health Minister Keheliya Rambukwella while making allegations concerning the alleged provision of substandard medicines.

Archchuna said he was not afraid of being questioned or arrested under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA), adding that he would cooperate if summoned by the Terrorism Investigation Division (TID).

“If I am told to report to the TID, I can come there wearing slippers, shorts and a T-shirt,” he said.

He said there was no need for authorities to pursue or arrest him and invited the TID to inform him if his presence was required.

“I request the TID to send me the location through WhatsApp. I will be there. There is no need to chase me and catch me,” he said.

Archchuna also urged President Anura Kumara Dissanayake to focus on what he described as major cases rather than pursuing “small people”.

Referring to former Central Bank Governor Arjuna Mahendran in connection with the Central Bank bond controversy, he called for individuals wanted in connection with major cases to be brought before the law.

Archchuna said he had previously asked people to vote for the present government but had since become disappointed.

“I requested people to vote for this government. Now I also feel ashamed that I asked them to do so,” he said.