’Siriliya Saviya’ funds still in account, no corruption involved: Defense counsel

Colombo, Oct. 7 (Daily Mirror) - President’s Counsel Anil Silva, appearing for Shiranthi Rajapaksa, told court that the funds in question were still in the ‘Siriliya Saviya’ account at the Suduwella Branch, adding that although Rs. 160 million was required to purchase a CT scanner, only Rs. 42 million had been collected by 2014, after which the account was frozen following a complaint made after the change of government.

Former President Mahinda Rajapaksa’s wife, Shiranthi Rajapaksa, who was arrested over corruption allegations, was ordered to be remanded till October 13 by Colombo Additional Magistrate Darshika Premaratne.

Meanwhile, Pradeep Kariyawasam, the former Chairman of the National Savings Bank and the husband of former Chief Justice Shirani Bandaranayake, was ordered to be released on bail.

He was ordered to be released on two sureties of Rs. 10 million each and a foreign travel ban was also imposed on him.

After recording a statement for nearly two hours, Shiranthi Rajapaksa was arrested by the investigating officers. Thereafter, the investigating officers brought her to the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption.

Meanwhile, the Bribery Commission today arrested Pradeep Kariyawasam, former Chairman of the National Savings Bank and husband of former Chief Justice Shirani Bandaranayake, in connection with investigations into the ‘Siriliya Saviya’ account.

After recording statements for nearly six hours at the Bribery Commission, the suspects Shiranthi Rajapaksa and Pradeep Kariyawasam were produced before the Colombo Magistrate’s Court this afternoon.

Assistant Director of Legal, Counsel Yashmada Lokunarangoda appeared in court for the Bribery Commission.

“Your Honour, this investigation was commenced based on a written complaint filed by the Anti-Corruption Front in 2015. It was regarding financial irregularities in an account named ‘Siriliya Saviya’ at the Suduwella Branch of the People’s Bank.

Thereafter, a joint investigation was conducted by the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption and the Police Financial Crimes Investigation Division.

It was revealed during the investigation that in 2010, based on a written request by suspect Shiranthi Rajapaksa stating that the funds were required to obtain a CT scanner for the Lady Ridgeway Hospital for Children, a sum of Rs. 10 million had been credited to the ‘Siriliya Saviya’ account by the National Savings Bank.

At the time, the Chairman of the National Savings Bank was the first suspect, Pradeep Kariyawasam. Members of the Board of Directors of the bank at the time have stated that the transfer of these funds had taken place outside the normal procedure of the bank.

Accordingly, investigations have revealed that Pradeep Kariyawasam had committed the offence of corruption under Section 70 of the Bribery Act, while the second suspect, Shiranthi Rajapaksa, had committed an offence falling under the Public Property Act by aiding and abetting the offence and using the said funds for her personal use.

Furthermore, Your Honour, it is not only the said Rs. 10 million that had been credited to this ‘Siriliya Saviya’ account. It has so far been revealed that Rs. 8.8 million from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at the time and Rs. 22 million from a company named Huawei had also been credited to this ‘Siriliya Saviya’ account.

Investigations are also being conducted under the Act relating to property derived from the commission of an offence. During that investigation, it has so far been revealed that a house in the Torrington area had been purchased using the funds in question received from the National Savings Bank.

Therefore, Your Honour, as a certificate has been submitted against the second suspect under Section 8(1) of the Public Property Act, we request that she be remanded until the conclusion of the trial.”

President’s Counsel Nalinda Indatissa, who appeared in court on behalf of the first suspect, Pradeep Kariyawasam, stated as follows:

“It has been stated to court by the Bribery Commission that my client has committed an offence under Section 70 of the Anti-Corruption Act. Under the said Bribery Act, this court has the power to grant bail to my client.

The information regarding the offence was received in 2015, and 11 years have now passed. Under Section 14 of the Bail Act, the grounds for refusing bail to my client are failing to assist the investigation or appear before court, influencing witnesses, committing another offence while on bail, and the possibility of public unrest if bail is granted. These are the grounds for refusing bail to my client. However, the Bribery Commission did not mention any such grounds today.

My client suffers from sleep apnoea. When he sleeps, he requires the assistance of a machine. He wakes up 17 times within two hours. If he does not wake up in that manner, his life could be endangered. He wakes up in order to prevent death.

Furthermore, he has two lumps at the back of his head. Due to that condition, his neurological condition has weakened. It could also pose a threat to his life.

Furthermore, no offence under the Public Property Act has been revealed against him. No charges have been levelled against him under that Act. Therefore, he should be released on bail.”

Thereafter, President’s Counsel Anil Silva made a bail application on behalf of the suspect Shiranthi Rajapaksa.

“Your Honour, ‘Siriliya Saviya’ has been an officially approved welfare organisation engaged in welfare activities since 2006. The National Savings Bank had credited funds available for their community services to the ‘Siriliya Saviya’ account.

We are not denying that. Even today, the said money is in the account at the said Suduwella Branch.

The reason is that although we needed Rs. 160 million to purchase the CT scanner, by 2014, we had only collected Rs. 42 million. In 2014, immediately after the change of government, when the said complaint was received, our account was frozen.

Therefore, Your Honour, no corruption has taken place. Because when the account was frozen, the collection of funds stopped. We could not purchase the CT scanner costing Rs. 160 million because we could not purchase it with the Rs. 42 million we had collected. There was no wrongdoing here.

If the freeze on the account had been lifted, even today the National Savings Bank could take the money if it wanted. Unfortunately, this situation has arisen because a Rajapaksa is involved.”