The Sirisena – Ranil conflict and events leading to MR’s return as PM

The Commonwealth Institute arranged for me to attend a conference on Science and Technology held in Sydney with the assistance of the Australian government. This meeting was of special interest to us because a large number of our technical officers had trained there under the Colombo Plan which was managed by the Commonwealth office. Many of staffers had returned to Australia and held positions as engineers and technicians, both with the national government and the Sydney municipal administration.

They had earned a reputation as hardworking and reliable employees. In particular we had many graduates of Katubedda Technical College among them. I had discussions with them and they offered to gift some equipment necessary to their alma mater. I was keen to expand the number of such training institutes in Sri Lanka as there was a big demand for them. We managed to resurrect the Katubedde College’s branch premises in Borella so that classes could also be conducted there in order to increase the trainee intake.

My pledge was to double the intake in all our training centres which were lagging behind and were merely comfort zones to the staff. They had to be galvanized through entreaties as well as threats. But in the end we reached our goals though the standards of our training staff, particularly in the outstations, left much to be desired. Technical training is the Achilles’ heel of our education system.

From University days I have been interested in countries in eastern Europe largely because of my sympathy with the left. Our friends at Peradeniya who supported the Communist party often spent their holidays with affiliated youth organizations behind the “Iron Curtain”. My friend Sarath Mutettuwegama was an office bearer of the USSR sponsored World Youth Congress which met regularly in Hungary, Poland or East Germany [GDR]. As mentioned in the early volumes of my autobiography, I was a regular visitor to the GDR from where I extended my stays to tour Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. [Some of these countries ceased to exist after the fall of the USSR].

But I had not visited Poland even though its politics, which started the disintegration of the almighty USSR, due to the intervention of the Polish Pope John and the port workers of Gdansk spearheaded by Solidarity – their trade union – was keenly followed by me. Another sphere of my interest was the Polish cinema which threw up great directors like Andrej Wajda, Roman Polanski and Kieslowski. Films like “Ashes and Diamonds” “The Train” “Three Colours” and “Knife in the Water”were shown to select audiences by the Polish embassy in Colombo after they began to cut loose from Soviet control.

I was therefore quite happy when I received an invitation from the Polish Parliament to deliver their annual Asia lecture to its members and their foreign policy establishment. It was a rare honour and I suspected that it had the support of the Polish embassy in Colombo. I arrived in Warsaw in the bitter cold and was driven to a state guest house which was well equipped and boasted of a superb kitchen.

My speech to Parliament was chaired by the Speaker with the Minister of Foreign Affairs in attendance. To suit the occasion I drew attention to developments in India and China as well as Sri Lanka based on demographic changes and urbanization. Special emphasis was given to economic development in the region and the opening up of greater opportunities for trade, tourism and investment. I began with a reference to Polish resistance to both Nazism during the second world war and USSR domination in the immediate post war era. After the war the map of Europe was redrawn by the allied powers meeting in Potsdam and Teheran.

Following the lecture I was entertained to tea with the MP’s. After that I had a meeting with the Prime Minister in his office. It was a grand affair and all the arrangements recalled to my mind the receptions we had encountered when I accompanied the Director General of UNESCO on his formal visits to member states.

The following day in Warsaw was spent on a program arranged by Ambassador Wijeratne in consultation with the Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It included a visit to the head office of a company that imported and marketed “Ceylon Tea” which they obtained through Russia. Russia had developed into a major buyer of our teas which were shipped to Moscow godowns via the Bospherus and Crimean ports. I also visited the University of Warsaw and spent time in the student quarter which reminded me of the Latin quarter in Paris. It was full of life. Bookshops and coffee shops were crowded with argumentative young people seeking refuge from the bitter cold.

The bookshops displayed posters and book covers representative of the famous cinema and graphic industry of Poland. In no other country, except perhaps in Cuba, have I seen such an emphasis on visual culture. During the days of the Comintern regular “Peace Conferences” were held in Warsaw and “avant garde” posters and short films advertising such meetings were distributed freely.

The most poignant part of my tour was to the “Warsaw Ghetto”. Made internationally famous in literature and film, this small “quartier” housed the leading Jews of pre-war Poland in the heart of Warsaw city. It became the centre of brutal attacks by the Nazi occupiers. However it entered history as the best instance of Jews fighting back though knowing full well that their efforts were doomed. In most other cases Jews of Europe went silently, with no resistance, to be deported to death camps.

In the suburbs of Berlin for instance there is a small railway station [Grunwald?] where rich Jews who lived in that posh district passively lined up for deportation. This rail head is still kept in its original state as a grim reminder of a time when a whole race could be earmarked for annihilation in so called civilized Europe. Today the Warsaw ghetto is a shrine which attracts large numbers of visitors.

Finally we went on an excursion to the banks of the Po river from which the country derives its name. It was frozen solid making it difficult to view it as a border between Russia and Poland. Poland in particular has seen its boundaries changed with every call to arms from the Stalin-Hitler pact to the redrawing of the map of Europe after the end of the second world war. But one boundary has remained unchanged namely the Po river which is recognized as an ever present landmark denoting the sovereignty of that ancient land.

Though Sirisena was propelled to power by the UNP, he and Ranil had irreconcilable differences on almost every issue. The new President was an unreconstructed Marxist having entered politics as an acolyte of N Sanmugathasan, the China worshiping Communist leader. In 1971 Sirisena had been imprisoned for several months on suspicion of being a JVP supporter. He however denies that he was ever a JVPer and attributes his incarceration to a wrongful accusation by his school principal who disliked his radical ideas.

In the SLFP he identified himself with the “China wing” led by Ratne Deshapriya who contested the Minneriya seat and defeated CP de Silva in 1970. Deshapriya, who was a total stranger to Polonnaruwa district depended on local radicals like Sirisena to get him the votes to beat CP who was a legend and the author of the district’s prosperity. The defeated CP did not return to his electorate and died not long after as a man who could not accept his sad fate.

In economic policy Sirisena was a dedicated socialist. He was not sympathetic to the economic policies of the Ranil-Ravi Karunanayake combine which were promoted by the UNP majority in the Sirisena Cabinet. He was against privatization and resorted to delaying tactics to stop the momentum of Ranil-Ravi reforms. The UNP leader too made no effort to keep the President informed. Malik Samarawickrema, who enjoyed a close personal friendship with Sirisena, was deputed to keep in touch with him but that became a sporadic affair.

Sirisena and Ranil had a brief meeting on Wednesdays, just prior to Cabinet meetings, but they dealt mainly with the agenda items to be taken up in Cabinet. Another source of conflict was the different “cultural backgrounds” of the two personalities. Having expressed his subservience to Ranil while on the campaign trail to gather UNP votes and election funds, Sirisena now had to play the role of senior partner. He did try to help the UNP to win the Parliamentary election by stating publicly that he will not make MR the Prime Minister even if the “Pohottuwa” won the battle. But that was more to secure his own position.

Later he was to dismiss Ranil and make MR the Prime Minister, with disastrous consequences for both him and MR. Sirisena tried to woo Sajith Premadasa openly by favouring him in Cabinet and offering to make him PM instead of Ranil. Thus the “Yahapalanaya” regime was crippled from the start due to internal conflicts. It had a sad record of governance which led to the splitting up of the UNP and its total defeat at the next Presidential election when Gotabaya Rajapaksa swept the board.

Some of the SLFP ministers and party officials were dissatisfied as they were not admitted to the centres of power in the “Yahapalanaya” regime. UNP Ministers too who had done well in the general election, looked askance at some SLFP Ministers who had lost their seats but had persuaded President Sirisena to nominate them as National list MPs. But what was decisive was the spectacular rise of the SLPP, popularly called the “Pohottuwa”.

The Yahapalanaya [Sirisena] administration, aided and abetted by the JVP, set about investigating the allegations of corruption, in particular against the Rajapaksa family. MR and members of his extended family were under scrutiny by a special committee set up by Ranil with the participation of the JVP and other sympathetic party leaders. This committee proposed legal action against miscreants to the Attorney General. The AG in turn initiated legal proceedings and much publicity was given to the alleged transactions of the Rajapaksa family.

The Rajapaksas began working behind the scenes to abort these investigations. Several drafts of legislation needed to speed up legal action which was being snarled up either deliberately, or due to the usual lethargy of the administration, were submitted to Cabinet but no action was forthcoming. All we heard on the grapevine was that some politicians on the government side were pressurizing the President to go easy on their erstwhile comrades of the SLFP.

The time had come for the Pohottuwa leaders to make a dramatic move. By this time the Pohottuwa led by Basil Rajapaksa, who has good administrative skills, had grown from strength to strength and were positioning themselves as the incoming government. My nephew Dilum was placed at the heart of this come back operation having been the first SLFP MP to climb onto the Pohottuwa stage defying SLFP party orders. The rapid rise of this new political formation tended to diminish the resolve of the investigators. The prelude to a “Parliamentary coup” by Sirisena was some information given to the police by a notorious and unreliable informer, that an attempt will be made on the lives of President Sirisena and Gotabaya Rajapaksa.

GR was emerging as a possible “Pohottuwa” candidate for the next election. Through these hush hush operations Sirisena was persuaded that he had to replace Ranil as PM with the beleaguered Mahinda Rajapaksa. MR was happy to oblige mostly to take the heat off corruption inquiries. Sirisena then undertook the difficult task of convincing the SLFP Central Committee of the need for a change and allow his underlings to secretively seek out UNP members who would cross over and provide him a majority in Parliament. The leaders of this SLFP maneuver were SB Dissanayake, Amaraweera and Thilanga Sumathipala who undertook to bring Mahinda and his “Pohottuwa” into a new government which was to be the nucleus of a new Parliamentary majority.

I was totally unaware of these goings on, particularly because I was engrossed in the work of my Ministry. I realized the importance of our training efforts for the economy as well as for the fortunes of many of our youth. Earlier on the day of the surprise swearing in of MR I was on the same stage with Sirisena as he was the Chief Guest on my invitation at an anniversary celebration of the National Science Foundation.

After the meeting I drove with him in the President’s limousine to his office where we were to have a meeting of the SLFP Central Committee. On the way, oblivious to Sirisena’s designs, I asked him whether he would like me to speak to Ranil to bring about a rapprochement to get out of the current impasse. He was not very responsive but hinted that it may be too late and repeated his then well worn criticism that there were irreconcilable cultural differences between the two.

I had scarcely entered the President’s office when there was a flurry of activity and a large group of people from the “Pohottuwa” entered with a subdued MR bringing in the rear. This was followed by his taking the oath of office of Prime Minister before Sirisena. He was cheered by his coterie and some of our Ministers who were privy to this deal. After a hurried tea break he left for home. After MR’s departure Sirisena addressed the SLFP Ministers who had moments before lost their ministerial office since with the appointment of the new PM they became “functus”.

He said that they will all be accommodated in the new Cabinet which would be sworn in the following day. Soon after I left for home and on my way out of the building I met Amaraweera – an architect of the new dispensation. He told me that I would be appointed the Minister of Foreign Affairs and that Basil in particular had been happy with that decision.

(Volume 3 of the Sarath Amunugama autobiography is available at the Vijitha Yapa Bookshop)

Sri Lanka’s Marine Frontline: Dr. Samantha Gunasekara’s Battle Against Plastic Pollution and Transboundary Waste

THE RICH ARE GETTING RICHER, THE POOR ARE GETTING POORER – THAT’S THE DILEMMA

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.