A greener tomorrow with NSB’s New Year initiative that promotes savings and sustainability

National Savings Bank (NSB), one of Sri Lanka’s leading state-owned financial institutions, takes pride in continuing its long-standing tradition of celebrating the Sinhala and Tamil New Year by promoting financial savings as well as environmental sustainability through a series of meaningful initiatives.

A highlight of this year’s programme is the continuation of NSB’s deeply rooted tradition of offering a “plant sapling at the auspicious time” (නැකතට පැළයක්) to customers who perform New Year transactions on April 15, 2026. This initiative has been carried out consistently over the years and stands as a unique symbol of NSB’s commitment to thrift, sustainability, and environmental responsibility. The New Year (Avurudu) Traditional Transactions of the National Savings Bank were held on 15th April 2026 at the Head Office Branch under the patronage of the Chairman, Dr. Harsha Cabral PC.

The event was attended by the Acting General Manager/CEO, Rohana Bandara Weerakoon, Deputy General Manager, Gamini Jayaweera, Deputy General Manager, Nalika Wijesinghe, Assistant General Manager, Janaka Herath, Assistant General Managers, and a gathering of customers.

The concept behind this program goes beyond a ceremonial gesture. It reflects NSB’s philosophy that saving money for the future and nurturing the environment are equally important responsibilities. Through this initiative, the Bank encourages the public to “save for the future while saving the environment.”

This programme is further strengthened through NSB’s Agro Forestry initiative, which actively promotes tree planting and environmental conservation among the public. The Agro Forestry project empowers communities to engage in sustainable agricultural practices while contributing towards environmental protection. In today’s context of increasing environmental challenges, such initiatives are more relevant and important than ever. NSB has consistently committed to and supported this cause.

In keeping with the tradition, a Rs.10/- coin will be offered to all our customers, who visit the Branch for New Year transactions, during the auspicious time, signifying a prosperous and fortunate beginning to the New Year. Special cash rewards will be given to customers who visit the post offices and sub-post offices for New Year transactions. Customers who deposit Rs. 100/- to Rs. 999/- will be offered a coin of Rs. 10/- while those who deposit Rs. 1,000/- and above will be offered a note of Rs. 100/-.

Additionally, NSB continues its practice of distributing the highly popular Ayurvedic almanac (Lith), free of charge through all its branches. Available in both Sinhala and Tamil, the Lith provides a valuable guidance on New Year rituals, auspicious times, and traditional lifestyle practices.

Established in 1972, NSB has played a pivotal role in fostering a strong savings culture across Sri Lanka, while supporting national economic development. Through these New Year initiatives, the Bank reaffirms its commitment to integrating tradition into modern banking while delivering a powerful message to society:

“Save for your future – and protect the environment for generations to come.”

We warmly invite you to plant your sapling received for this year’s New Year transactions, at the auspicious time of 9:01 a.m. on April 23. It is not merely a symbolic act. It represents your commitment, not only towards saving for your future, but also to protecting and nurturing the environment.

Bourse enlivened by positive ripple effects from reducing M-E tensions

Mahindra Ideal Finance celebrates debenture listing at Colombo Stock Exchange

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.