Dialog unveils South Asia’s 1st 5G eSIM MiFi

Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s #1 connectivity provider, has introduced South Asia’s first 5G MiFi with eSIM capability and Wi-Fi 6 technology, offering a powerful portable internet solution for ultra-fast and reliable connectivity on the move.

The launch strengthens Dialog’s leadership in next-generation connectivity, powered by Sri Lanka’s largest and fastest-growing 5G network, with over 1,000 live 5G sites across all 25 districts.

Designed for professionals, businesses, students, travellers and families, Dialog 5G Ultra MiFi delivers fast and reliable internet wherever users live, work or travel.

The compact plug-and-play device is ideal for remote work, business travel, temporary workspaces and backup internet needs, while extending high-speed connectivity to locations where fixed broadband may be unavailable.

As South Asia’s first 5G MiFi with eSIM capability, the device supports both the Dialog 5G Ultra and 4G networks. Equipped with advanced Wi-Fi 6 technology, it supports up to 16 connected devices simultaneously, while its 5000mAh battery delivers up to 16 hours of continuous use.

Type-C USB connectivity provides added flexibility for internet access across laptops, tablets, smartphones and other Wi-Fi-enabled devices. The launch further strengthens Dialog’s position as Sri Lanka’s leading eSIM innovator. Building on pioneering services such as eSIM One Number and eSIM Quick Transfer, Dialog continues to make connected experiences simpler, smarter and more seamless for the customers.

Dialog Axiata Group Chief Operating Officer Lim Li San said, “Connectivity today needs to move with people. Whether working remotely, travelling or managing multiple connected devices, the customers expect fast and reliable internet wherever they are. As we continue to expand Sri Lanka’s most extensive 5G network, we are also growing the ecosystem of devices that unlock its full potential. The introduction of South Asia’s first 5G eSIM MiFi is another step towards making next-generation connectivity more accessible, flexible and convenient for all Sri Lankans.”

Dialog 5G MiFi works seamlessly with the Dialog Ultra plans, including Dialog Ultra 1495, 1895, 2595, 2995 and 3999. These plans enable the customers to enjoy Dialog 5G Ultra connectivity where available, with continued connectivity over 4G.

Dialog 5G Ultra MiFi, with eSIM, is priced at Rs.39,990 and is available via www.dialog.lk and selected Dialog outlets, with easy payment plans of up to 60 months available through leading credit card partners.

The customers purchasing the device in-store at selected Dialog outlets can also enjoy applicable Club Vision discounts. For more information, visit https://dialog.lk/accessories/dialog-5g-ultra-mifi-mf511.