Disasters and warship on mercy mission

Warships are behemoths that invoke fear and wreak havoc, whether they are fictitious ones like the Man-of-War in Conrad’s Heart of Darkness, firing cannon indiscriminately on indigenous territory or modern, massive aircraft carriers that project airpower at sea and destroy distant targets. They are obviously designed for combat, but they can serve positive purposes. An aircraft carrier has embarked on a humanitarian mission to save lives and provide disaster assistance, giving a whole new meaning to the deployment of warships.

INS Vikrant, India’s first indigenous aircraft carrier, currently docked in Colombo, has undertaken a humanitarian mission in Sri Lanka, which is struggling to carry out search and rescue operations and distribute relief amidst torrential rains, with rivers overflowing, reservoir bunds bursting and mountains collapsing; tens of thousands of people are crying out for help. Weather disasters have claimed more than 210 lives during the last few days, according to official reports. Hundreds of people have gone missing, and the death toll is rising.

Pakistan has also launched a major operation to assist Sri Lanka. Its naval ship PN SAIF, currently on a port call in Colombo, too, has provided relief to the disaster victims and deployed a helicopter for rescue operations. Such assistance will go a long way towards helping the disaster victims. Many other countries have come forward to provide disaster assistance.

It was heartening to see two choppers from Vikrant, India’s pride, braving inclement weather and doing sorties to save lives in the disaster-stricken areas of this country. Their deployment has stood many disaster victims in good stead. This humanitarian gesture has cast India, often perceived as the Orwellian Big Brother, in the exalted image of Loku Aiya or Periya Anna, the affectionate Sri Lankan term for the caring eldest brother.

The Vikrant crew members, particularly the pilots, and other Indian helicopter personnel, working alongside their Sri Lankan counterparts in rescue and relief missions, have elevated Indo-Lanka relations to a new height. The Pakistani chopper crew and naval personnel have done something similar; they have strengthened bonds between two traditional friends––Pakistan and Sri Lanka.

Meanwhile, climate change and the alarming increase in natural disasters the world over have demonstrated the interconnectedness of nations and the shared vulnerability of humanity. No country is safe however big it may be. Nature is no respecter of the military might and economic prowess of any country.

One could argue that nature, like the Grim Reaper, is a great leveller. Numerous tragic weather events in many countries during the past several decades bears this out. They include Hurricane Katrina (2005) and the California wildfires (2024) in the US. It is doubtful whether there is any country that has been free from such disasters.

Sadly, US President Donald Trump is a dyed-in-the-wool Climate Change naysayer. He is prominent among the leaders who question, deny, or express scepticism about human-caused climate change and its impacts. How many more weather disasters the world must endure before they abandon their climate denialism and come to terms with reality?

Dire warnings of far worse weather disasters in the next few years should jolt all nations into devising ways and means of facing the unfolding Climate Emergency collectively. There is no defence against nature’s fury. At this rate, the day may not be far off when all countries, big or small, are left with no alternative but to cut down on their defence budgets, allocate more funds for disaster management and even resort to measures such as repurposing their military vehicles to carry out rescue missions and provide relief to disaster victims.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.