Letters of Credit for vehicle imports on the decline along with relevant prices – CBSL Governor

The letters of credit for vehicle imports in the country have fallen in November compared to July and car import prices are also falling, Central Bank Governor Dr Nandalal Weerasinghe said.

“In July, August, September we saw a large number of imports. Now the pent up demand is over and the demand has come down in November. Gradually it is reaching equilibrium level, Dr Weerasinghe told at a post-monetary policy media briefing yesterday. The event was held at the Central Bank head office in Colombo .

He said that the Central Bank has maintained its policy rate at 7.75 percent in November 2025. It will help reflate the economy to 5 percent from current largely stable prices.

Dr. Weerasinghe added: ‘”Sri Lanka’s rupee had depreciated steadily in 2025, amid record current account surpluses and reduction in budget deficits, helping push up prices of imported goods, amid strong private credit growth.

“The recent depreciation pressure on the rupee has subsided with the improvement in foreign exchange liquidity.

“Gross official reserves were above 6 billion US dollars in 2025, helped by net foreign exchange purchases by the Central Bank. Expected additional inflows in December 2025 include receipts from the multilateral organisations.

“The Asian Development Bank has approved several budget support loans totalling around 270 million dollars in recent weeks and the IMF’s executive is expected to meet on December 15, linked to a 358 million dollar tranche.

“Though gross reserves have stagnated, the Central Bank has settled its reserve related debt to the Reserve Bank of India and the International Monetary Fund, pushing up net foreign assets and helping meet net international reserve targets of the IMF.

” The Monetary Policy Board decided to maintain the Overnight Policy Rate (OPR) at the current level of 7.75%. The Board arrived at this decision after carefully considering evolving developments and the outlook on both domestic and global fronts. .

” The Board is of the view that the current monetary policy stance will support steering inflation towards the target of 5 percent.

” Headline inflation based on the Colombo Consumer Price Index (CCPI) continued to accelerate in October for the third consecutive month. Inflation is expected to rise more gradually than projected earlier and move towards the target by H2-2026. Core inflation is also expected to accelerate at a modest pace, as demand in the economy gradually strengthens. Medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored around the inflation target.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.