CWIT earns 2026 Great Place to Work certification

Colombo West International Terminal (Private) Limited (CWIT) is certified by Great Place to Work.

It is the first-ever container terminal in Sri Lanka to achieve this certification.

The prestigious award is based entirely on what the current employees say about their experience working at in the company. Eighty-eight percent of employees said it’s a great place to work.

Great Place to Work is the global authority on workplace culture, employee experience and leadership behaviours proven to deliver market-leading revenue, employee retention and increased innovation.

“The Great Place to Work certification is a highly coveted achievement that requires consistent and intentional dedication to the overall employee experience,” said Great Place to Work Vice President Global Recognition Sarah Lewis-Kulin.

“We are immensely proud to be recognised as the first container terminal in Sri Lanka to achieve the Great Place to Work certification,” said CWIT CEO Munish Kanwar.

“We owe our continued success to our team of dedicated employees at CWIT and celebrate and thank them for all they do to earn this incredible recognition. Their passion, commitment and unwavering focus on excellence have also enabled us to achieve another historic milestone—becoming the first terminal in the Port of Colombo to reach one million TEUs within just 11 months of commissioning, the fastest such achievement in Sri Lankan port’s history.

We are also proud to have developed the first female automated ship-to-shore crane operator in the region, reflecting our commitment to creating opportunities, fostering diversity and empowering talent. These achievements are a true testament to the exceptional dedication, capability and spirit of our people.”

“This milestone reflects our commitment to fostering an inclusive, people-centric culture where everyone has the opportunity to thrive,” said CWIT Human Resources Head Thimesh Nanayakkara.

“We are particularly proud to have one of the highest female representations in the container terminal industry, with nearly 20 percent women in our workforce, while 60 percent of our employees are fresh talent who have been given the opportunity to build rewarding careers with us.”