Govt should be judged by its actions

Colombo, July 30 (Daily Mirror) - Responding to a question on whether the government is determined to proceed with extending the retirement age of superior court judges, Justice Minister Harshana Nanayakkara said that the government should be judged by its actions.

However, he declined to make any further comment on the matter.

“You have to judge us by our actions,” he said, adding that he was acting in accordance with the principle of collective Cabinet responsibility.

Asked to comment on the resolution adopted by the Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) opposing the move, the Minister again declined to comment but said he was prepared to convey the organisation’s views to the Cabinet.

“I should not comment on the BASL today. I have not watched their programme and I know very little about it. I am only carrying out collective Cabinet responsibility. Whatever ideas they bring to me, I will take them to the Cabinet,” he said.

The government has already obtained Cabinet approval to amend the Constitution to extend the retirement age of superior court judges.

Article 107(5) of the Constitution states: “The age of retirement of Judges of the Supreme Court shall be sixty-five years and of Judges of the Court of Appeal shall be sixty-three years.”

Following Cabinet approval, steps have been initiated to draft the necessary legislation to increase the retirement age of superior court judges by two years.

The move has already drawn opposition from the BASL, the professional body representing around 26,000 lawyers. The Association convened a special meeting yesterday and adopted a resolution expressing its opposition to the proposed amendment.

The BASL has argued that the proposal could undermine public confidence in the independence, impartiality and integrity of the superior courts.

The Commonwealth Lawyers Association has also cautioned that even the perception of interference with judicial tenure could damage the reputation of Sri Lanka’s judicial system and affect confidence in the independence of the judiciary.

BASL was not consulted on proposed judges’ retirement age amendment: BASL President

BASL unanimously passes resolution against proposed judges’ retirement age amendment