Futamura and Biopap advance compostable food service solutions

Futamura UK, a global leader in sustainable cellulose-based solutions, and Biopap, a pioneer in compostable food packaging, are reinforcing their 25-year relationship to accelerate innovation in compostable solutions for the food service industry.

The collaboration combines Futamura’s regenerated cellulose film, NatureFlex, with Biopap’s high-performance, compostable food trays. Together, the companies have developed functional compostable packaging, derived from renewable raw materials with the most practical end-of-life.

BIOPAP’s systemic approach considers the entire lifecycle of packaging, from sourcing renewable materials derived from sustainably managed forests to ensuring operational efficiency, food safety, and compostability at end-of-life. Its solutions are engineered to withstand a wide temperature range (-90°C to +175°C), while maintaining barrier properties and functionality suitable for professional catering applications, including cooking, storage, reheating, and consumption.

Typically, consumers eat directly from Biopap’s range of solutions. Therefore, as the packaging is inevitably contaminated by food residue, compostable packaging and/or packaging compatible with anaerobic digestion technology is required. Their solutions using NatureFlex are also fully recyclable in the paper waste stream. Their commitment was recently recognised when Biopap received the “Sustainable Development Award 2025” at the Ecomondo exhibition, highlighting its leadership in supporting the circular economy through long-term innovation.

Futamura’s expertise in regenerated cellulose films, produced from renewable wood pulp from responsibly managed plantations has been instrumental in supporting Biopap’s product development. NatureFlex films are used to line Biopap’s carton board trays to provide excellent barrier to oxygen, gas and resistance to oils and grease. Futamura films are EU and FDA direct food contact approved. They also meet all the relevant standards for industrial composting, including EN13432, ASTM D6400 and AS4736. They are also certified for home composting according to OK Compost Home protocol, to the French standard by Din Certco and the Australian home composting standard AS5810.

In addition, Futamura tested NatureFlex films for High Solids Anaerobic Digestion according to ISO15985:2004. The results showed that all samples could be considered as completely biodegradable under solid, anaerobic conditions.

Biopap solutions enable food waste and packaging to be processed together, transforming waste into valuable resources such as compost and biogas. A cradle to grave lifecycle assessment, demonstrates that Biopap Genius Meal Trays allow for a 66% reduction of carbon footprint when compared to conventional polypropylene (PP) trays. Beyond emissions reduction, the company emphasises the importance of biological circularity, returning nutrients from food waste back to the soil, improving biodiversity, water retention, and reducing reliance on fossil-based fertilisers.

As Biopap celebrates its 25th anniversary, it is also a recognition of a 25-year partnership between Futamura and the Italian container manufacturer. Both Biopap and Futamura reaffirm their ambition to lead the transition toward renewable, compostable packaging solutions that deliver environmental, operational, and societal benefits. The strength of the Futamura and Biopap collaboration lies in its shared and trusted vision. Long-standing relationships, continuity in teams, and a mutual commitment to continuous innovation have enabled both companies to evolve together and respond to emerging sustainability demands.

Futamura Sales Manager Giorgio Berton said: “I am very happy to collaborate with Biopap, a serious and reliable company that has believed and invested in sustainability for years. Over the years, they have developed various sustainable solutions, and Genius is a truly brilliant, practical, and high-performance idea.”

Biopap Co-Founder Dr. Eng. Michelangelo Anderlini said: “Our collaboration with Futamura has always been rooted in shared values, trust, and a passion for innovation. From the beginning, we sought partners who believed in renewable materials and compostability. Together, we have created tailored solutions that have led to multiple patented innovations and continue to push the boundaries of sustainable packaging.”