John Keells Properties aligns with FACETS 2026 as official real estate partner

John Keells Properties is supporting the Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association (SLGJA) to host its flagship premier gem and jewellery show ‘FACETS 2026’ as the Official Real Estate Partner.

The annual three-day show is scheduled to take place from 3 to 5 January 2026, at Cinnamon Life, City of Dreams.

This collaboration will see the country’s most significant gem fair move to an elite venue, strengthening Sri Lanka’s position as a global luxury destination.

John Keells Group Head of Sales and Marketing/Vice President, Nadeem Shums said: “Real estate and jewellery have always represented more than luxury, representing permanence. A gem and a home hold stories, value, and emotion that are passed down from one generation to the next. At John Keells Properties, we craft spaces that endure, much like the masterpieces showcased at FACETS.”

Explaining the commercial rationale for the partnership, he confirmed that the FACETS 2026 exhibition will serve as a key sales platform for John Keells Properties to showcase the remaining 20% of their luxury residential properties. Projects including The Residences Cinnamon Life, TRI-ZEN, VIMAN, and Victoria Golf Resort – Sunrise Ridge Villas will be highlighted at the show.

He affirmed John Keells Properties’ commitment, saying that they are proud to support next year’s exhibition and to stand alongside an industry that carries centuries of heritage. Looking ahead to the exhibition, he said: “We look forward to an exceptional show in early January 2026 and to welcoming the world to experience the very best of this island, through its craftsmanship, gems, creativity, and through the landmark developments that continue to shape the future of Sri Lanka.”

He confirmed that the event is set to host over 100 exhibitors and attract delegates from key markets in Asia, Europe, and the Middle East, solidifying the importance of this coordinated effort between the gem trade and Sri Lanka’s largest private sector developer.

SLGJA President Akram Cassim, highlighted the exhibition’s long history and purpose. He noted that FACETS 2026 marks the 33rd edition of the annual show, which has been held since 1991, and has always been more than a trade show; a celebration of heritage and the artistry behind the Ceylon Sapphire.

“John Keells Properties embodies the same principles that define FACETS excellence, craftsmanship, and enduring value. Their participation as the Official Real Estate Partner reinforces the connection between spaces that inspire and jewellery that transcends generations, elevating the experience for all our visitors,’’ Cassim said.

Recognised globally as Sri Lanka’s flagship gem and jewellery exhibition, FACETS Sri Lanka attracts international buyers, collectors, and enthusiasts. This year, the presence of John Keells Properties introduces a new dimension to the event, uniting artistry with architecture, and beauty with investment value.