Miss Universe 2025 More ‘surprises’ before Crowning day!

Unexpected events seem to have cropped up at this year’s Miss Universe pageant and there could be more ‘surprises’ before the crowning day – Friday, 21st November, 2025, at the at the Impact Challenger Hall, in Pak Kret, Nonthaburi, Thailand..

First, the controversy involving the pageant’s Thai Director and Miss Mexico, and then the withdrawal of some of the contestants from the 74th Miss Universe pageant.

However, I’m told that Sri Lanka’s representative, Lihasha Lindsay White, is generating some attention, and that is ecouraging, indeed.

While success in the pageant is highly competitive and depends on performance during the live events, let’s hope Lihasha is heading in the right direction.

The 27-year-old Miss Universe Sri Lanka is a businesswoman and mental health advocate, and, according to reports coming my way, has impressed with her poise, intellect, and stage presence.

Her strong advocacy for mental health brings a message of substance and style, which aligns with the Miss Universe Organisation’s current emphasis on impact and purpose beyond just aesthetics.

Lihasha has undergone rigorous training, including catwalk coaching, under internationally acclaimed mentors – Indonesia’s Putra Pasarela for runway coaching; and the Philippines’ Michelle Padayhag for Q&A mastery – which, I’m told, has strengthened her confidence and stage presence.

Pageant predictions are speculative and vary widely among experts. While some say there is a possibility of Lihasha tbreaking into the semi-finals, there is no guarantee of a win.

Ultimately, the outcome will be determined during the competition events, including the preliminary show, national costume segment, and the final night, where Lihasha will compete against representatives from over 100 countries.

Maureen Hingert: 2nd Runner-up in 1955 / Miss Mexico: Stood up for women’s rights

While Sri Lanka has not won the Miss Universe crown before, Maureen Hingert was placed as the 2nd Runner-up in 1955.

Lihasha Lindsay White is a dedicated candidate with a strong personal platform, and her performance in the remaining preliminary events, and at the final show, will determine Sri Lanka’s chances this year.

The competition, no doubt, will be fierce, with contestants bringing diverse backgrounds, preparation methodologies, and cultural perspectives.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.