Exhibitor registration for Sri Lanka Expo 2027 will be open till 31 July

The Sri Lanka Export Development Board (EDB), in collaboration with the Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Ministry announced that the deadline for online exhibitor registration for “Sri Lanka Expo 2027” will be open till 31 July, 2026.

Sri Lanka Expo 2027, scheduled to be held from 14 to 17 January 2027 at the BMICH, Colombo, is the country’s premier international trade exhibition, aimed at showcasing Sri Lanka’s export potential and strengthening global trade partnerships.

Local exporters participating in this exhibition will have the opportunity to meet over 1,500 global buyers and investors. Additionally, exhibitors will have the opportunity to arrange pre-scheduled business meetings with potential buyers.

A total of 650 exhibition booths have been allocated for Sri Lankan exporters and export potential companies across 25 sectors, showcasing the diversity of Sri Lanka’s export economy.

Industrial Products include Apparel, Textiles and Fashion, Rubber, Plastic and Chemical Products, Gems and Jewelry, Engineering and Automotive Components, Boat and Shipbuilding, Marine Services, Electrical and Electronic Products, Minerals and Mineral-based Products, Giftware, Lifestyle and Handicrafts, Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices, Printing and Packaging.

Agriculture Products include Tea, Spices and Concentrates, Coconut-based Products, Seafood/Edible Fish Products, Processed Foods and Beverages, Ayurveda, Herbal and Cosmetic Products, Cut Flowers and Foliage, Ornamental Fish, Fruits and Vegetables.

Export Services include Information and Communication Technology/Business Process Management, Tourism, Logistics Services, Construction and Renewable Energy, Wellness and Healthcare Services, and Other Services.

Sri Lankan exporters and companies with export potential are eligible to apply. As the number of exhibition booths are limited, a screening process will be conducted to select qualified exhibitors. EDB invites all exporters to register before 31 July 2026 and be a part of this national endeavor for the economic benefit of the country.

For further information and registration, the following officers may be contacted. For Industrial Products: Indika Sugathadasa (0718246762 | [email protected]), for Agriculture  Products: Jayani Galagedara (0710391184 | [email protected]), and for Services Sector: Dishant Yapa (0772953717 | [email protected]).