IM Motors backed by SAIC’s 100mn vehicle milestone

SAIC Motor has become the first Chinese automotive group to deliver 100 million vehicles worldwide, marking a milestone in the global automotive industry and reinforcing the manufacturing strength behind IM Motors, which is represented in Sri Lanka by Evolution Auto (Pvt.) Ltd.

IM Motors LS9 Hyper was the 100 millionth vehicle, highlighting IM Motors’ role as one of SAIC Motor’s next-generation premium electric vehicle (EV) brands and demonstrating the group’s ongoing commitment to intelligent mobility.

Evolution Auto CEO Virann de Zoysa said, “SAIC Motor’s accomplishment of delivering 100 million vehicles is a significant milestone that represents decades of engineering excellence, manufacturing capability and customer trust. The fact that IM Motors is supported by one of the largest automotive manufacturers in the world gives the Sri Lankan customers confidence. With expert after-sales service, genuine parts availability and a long-term dedication to each IM Motors owner, we, at Evolution Auto, are committed to enhancing that global strength with dependable local support through expert after-sales service, genuine parts availability and a long-term commitment to every IM Motors owner.”

With more than seven decades of automotive manufacturing experience, SAIC Motor has established itself as one of the world’s largest automotive manufacturers. Through a portfolio of internationally recognised brands, strategic partnerships and its own expanding line of intelligent EVs, its vehicles are sold in more than 170 countries and regions.

The milestone reinforces that IM Motors is backed by an established manufacturer with significant manufacturing capabilities, proven engineering expertise and a long-term commitment to innovation.

Evolution Auto, the authorised distributor of IM Motors in Sri Lanka, enhances this global foundation with local sales, after-sales service, genuine spare parts and technical know-how, ensuring the customers benefit from an ownership experience supported both locally and internationally.

As Sri Lanka’s EV market continues to evolve, the milestone reinforces IM Motors’ standing as a premium EV backed by one of the world’s most experienced automotive manufacturers.