Inclusive approach to all communities is in national interest

In contrast to intolerance in governance and towards others who are deemed to be outsiders that is increasingly being manifested in the world, Sri Lanka is taking a different path. It is adopting an inclusive approach to all communities that is in the national interest and is winning international support. The country’s recent conduct at the UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) is a case in point. Rather than forcing a vote that would have been divisive and that would have pitted Sri Lanka against the Western countries promoting the resolution, the government opted for cooperation over confrontation. By doing so it signaled to the international community that the country is not taking sides internationally and prefers engagement and dialogue to confrontation and defiance.

This choice is consistent with an evolving domestic policy of inclusion. There was a time when governments in Sri Lanka treated those from some minority communities as aliens and threats to the nation. This began at the dawn of Independence with the disenfranchisement of the Tamils of recent Indian origin (Malaiyaha Tamils) in 1948. Such early policy decisions set the country on a path of mistrust between communities and laid the foundations of a conflict that was both violent and prolonged. By contrast, the vision articulated by the present government in regard to the ethnic conflict is that every Sri Lankan citizen is equal and discrimination will not be permitted. The emphasis today is not on exclusion but on widening the national circle of belonging. The government is applying this policy across the board to other communities as well.

The government is now planning to apply the principle of equality, inclusion and non-discrimination to the LGBTIQ community, which is also a minority community that has suffered from prejudice and discriminatory laws in more recent times. This was not always the case.  Homosexuality became a legal offence in Sri Lanka only with the imposition of the British Penal Code of 1883.  The historical records show that the country had a liberal ethos prior to the colonial era which needs to be regained. The government needs to amend the archaic laws dating to the colonial period that criminalized same sex relations, laws that Britain itself has shed, and which neighboring India has struck down. The government has also indicated through the Tourist Board that those who belong to the LGBTIQ community worldwide are welcome to visit Sri Lanka as tourists.

Likewise, the government is moving to protect the rights of another minority community, the children of the country, who could be considered a minority community as they are powerless in the face of adult power. At present they are subjected to corporal punishment by their elders, often in the name of discipline. The abuse of this power is likely at the root of the culture of violence that manifests later in police torture and university ragging. Most parents would welcome a ban on corporal punishment in schools, having been victims themselves and having experienced the asymmetry in power that leads to abuse. It is a most unhealthy practice for adults, whether parents or teachers, to use violence against children who cannot defend themselves and depend on those very adults for their sustenance.

The values that the government is demonstrating with regard to the LGBTIQ community and to the protection of children are in accord with its pledges with regard to national reconciliation. Instead of being a set of disconnected pledges, these moves suggest a coherent approach to governance rooted in fairness and inclusion. They indicate that the government understands that reconciliation is not only about resolving ethnic grievances, but dismantling structures of systemic inequality and oppression wherever they exist. Inclusion cannot be compartmentalised. A democratic government needs to protect all its minorities whether ethnic, sexual, or generational.

The most recent UNHRC resolution lists out a long list of actions that the government needs to take. These include finding missing persons or the truth about what happened to them, release of those held in detention under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA), the repeal of the PTA, return of land, demilitarisation of the north and east and restoration of the devolution of power by holding the long postponed provincial council elections. The UNHRC resolution also continues with the “Sri Lanka Accountability Project” which the government objected to just as previous governments have. This is a mechanism located in the UN High Commissioner’s office in Geneva which collects information and data on human rights violations and war crimes that have taken place in Sri Lanka.

Ever since the war ended bloodily on the military battlefields, the concern of successive Sri Lankan governments has been the demand for accountability and war crimes trials that go beyond the national authorities. This meant an international demand for foreign judges, as in previous resolutions by the UN Human Rights Council or for action by the International Criminal Court.  But this time around, the Sri Lankan government appears to have been able to convince the international community of its sincerity in taking the reconciliation process forward through domestic and national processes. Its consistency of approach appears to have convinced the international community during the UNHRC deliberations.

Overall, the UNHRC resolution calls for the reconciliation process to take place through domestic or national mechanisms as promised by the government so that the final decisions are made by Sri Lankans and not by foreigners. This major concession by the international community is likely to have been the reason why the government did not wish to go for a divisive vote. A confrontational approach might have pleased hardliners at home, but it would have squandered the international goodwill that has only now begun to return. The decision not to force a vote, and to mobilise some countries to  vote against other countries was not an act of weakness but of prudence. It showed that the government recognises it cannot afford to be isolated or placed in a corner.

The economy continues to be in a precarious condition due to the economic collapse of 2022 (no fault of the present government) and a quarter of the population lives below the poverty line (double that of 2019). The country has lost close to a decade of development. It needs all the international assistance it can get from all quarters.  If Sri Lanka is to break decisively from its past, the opportunity is now and needs to be taken up without delay. The reconciliation promises repeated in Geneva must be reflected in the north, in the east, and in every community that awaits justice. If the government acts now, it will not only restore the country’s credibility abroad but rebuild unity at home through its inclusive approach.

The Viral ‘Cancer-Cure’ story – Why Sri Lanka needs professional science journalism

Survival of the fittest? The importance of context-sensitivity in education reform

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.