Vidullanka clinches Gold, Silver and Bronze at Taiki Akimoto 5S Awards 2025

Demonstrating commitment to a legacy of implementing productivity concepts in operational processes, Vidullanka PLC shined in the small category at the Taiki Akimoto 5S Awards, sweeping the main prizes as well as a merit for CSR.

The event, organised by the Japan Sri Lanka Technical and Cultural Association (JASTECA), was held on 11 October at the Galadari Hotel, recognising organisations that exemplify Japanese productivity and the 5S methodology.

Five power plants represented Vidullanka’s entry at the awards. Kothmale Mini Hydro Power Plant earned the coveted Gold Award in the small category, while Batatota Mini Hydro Power Plant claimed the Silver Award, and Wembiyagoda Mini Hydro Power Plant received the Bronze Award. Additionally, Madugeta Mini Hydro Power Plant was honored with a Merit Award, further strengthening Vidullanka’s winning streak in 5S excellence. Apart from this category, the Rideepa Mini Hydro Power Plant received a Merit for CSR and Sustainability for the WeManage river cleaning project.

Vidullanka PLC began its journey to initiate and incorporate 5S practices into its business operations over two decades ago. Through discipline, teamwork and innovation, the company has evolved in its productivity approaches and practices, nurturing a culture of excellence among its employees. Its recorded history of accolades received from JASTECA over the years is a testament to Vidullanka’s commitment to structured improvement and sustainable operations.

Chief Executive Officer Riyaz Sangani said, “These awards affirm that embedding the 5S philosophy across our operations has strengthened our ability to deliver reliable, sustainable energy while fostering a culture of continuous improvement and I am immensely proud of what we have accomplished together.”

Vidullanka PLC Director of Operations Roshan Siriwardana said, “Securing Gold, Silver, Bronze and a merit at this year’s Taiki Akimoto 5S Awards stands as a proud testament to our leadership excellence, exceptional teamwork, and unwavering commitment to continuous improvement. This clean sweep across the category highlights how we have successfully embedded the globally recognised 5S philosophy into every aspect of our operations—uniting technology, sustainability, and collaboration to achieve world-class performance.”