Sri Lanka Ambassador launches Ceylon Biscuits Company products in Saudi Arabia

Sri Lanka’s exports to Kingdom of Saudi Arabia achieves 19% growth from January to September 2025; bilateral trade up 9%

CBL–Amalcom collaboration is expected to contribute to a further increase in Sri Lankan exports to Saudi Arabia

The Ceylon Biscuits Ltd., (CBL) products were officially launched in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by the Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the Kingdom Ameer Ajwad on 10 December 2025 at the Four Seasons Hotel in Riyadh.

Sri Lanka’s CBL Group in collaboration with Aamalcom Trading Ltd., of Saudi Arabia brings CBL’s popular range of biscuits, chocolates, confectioneries, and snacks to consumers across the Kingdom.

Launching the CBL products, Ambassador Ajwad pointed out that the partnership marks a strategic milestone and is expected to enhance the visibility of Sri Lankan products in the Kingdom, creating new avenues for commercial

He also underscored that this initiative reflects the growing confidence of Saudi partners in Sri Lanka’s industrial and commercial capabilities.

The Ambassador further highlighted that Sri Lanka’s exports to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia recorded a double-digit increase of 19% from January to September 2025, compared to the same period in the previous year, and noted that the CBL–Amalcom collaboration is expected to contribute to a further increase in Sri Lankan exports to Saudi Arabia in the days ahead. He also stated that total bilateral trade had expanded by 9%, noting that these figures clearly demonstrate the growing complementarities between the two economies. In addition, he expressed hope that the recent establishment of the Saudi–Sri Lanka Business Council would be a game changer, serving as a vital platform for structured dialogue, trade facilitation, investment promotion, and closer collaboration between the private sectors of both countries.

The event brought together an esteemed gathering including Director of International Cooperation of Riyadh Chamber of Commerce, Mansour Al-Ajmi, senior corporate leaders of CBL Group including Group Director Rasith Wickramasinghe, Director/International Sales Nadeeja Karunatilaka, Senior Management team of the CBL Group, Aamalcom Trading Board member Ibrahim Al Shalaan as well as Director – International Trade Saeed Asif Khan, General Manager Ananth Rajasingam. In addition, members of the wider Saudi business community, including executives, investors, and trade partners as well as Saudi media personalities and influencers were present.

Founded in 1968, the CBL Group has evolved into one of Sri Lanka’s leading food manufacturing conglomerates. Known for its commitment to quality, innovation, and international standards, CBL operates with a strong supply chain and logistics infrastructure. The CBL group exports to over 65 countries worldwide, with 8 manufacturing facilities in Sri Lanka and 3 overseas manufacturing and distribution operations.

Aamalcom Trading, a subsidiary of Aamalcom Holding, leverages over 17 years of business expertise to provide reliable distribution, innovative solutions, and trusted partnerships. Focused on connecting global brands with the Saudi Arabian market, Aamalcom Trading delivers value, quality, and professionalism across a growing portfolio of products and services.

The launch was recognised as a significant milestone in Sri Lanka–Saudi Arabia economic relations, with anticipation of similar initiatives in the future to further strengthen trade and business collaboration between the two countries.