The 21st Build SL Housing  and Construction International Exhibition opens at BMICH

Transport, Highways, and Urban Development Ministry Secretary Eng. Kumudu Lal Bogahawatta (centre) inaugurates the exhibition

The much looked forward to Build SL Housing and Construction International Exhibition held for the 21st time kicked off yesterday at the Sirimavo Bandaranaike Memorial Exhibition Centre of the BMICH under the auspices of Transport, Highways, and Urban Development Ministry Secretary Eng. Kumudu Lal Bogahawatta.

The Build SL Housing and Construction International Exhibition which is now a premiere exhibition in the construction sector has been a platform for both leading local and international manufacturers to showcase their products.

The apex construction sector exhibition which has been a one stop shop for buyers and sellers has made steady progress with the number of exhibitors increasing remarkably each year.

A notable feature of this year’s exhibition is that it is held at a time when the construction sector is seeing a resurgence after steep contraction from 2020 to December 2023 due to the economic downturn that forced the government to stall large scale projects and investors to shelve their plans.

Transport, Highways, and Urban Development Secretary Eng. Kumudu Lal Bogahawatta stated that the country’s construction sector is finally rising after facing continuous contractions since March 2020, and emphasized that the government is fully committed to “realigning the construction for tomorrow.”

Bogahawatta highlighted the revival of the local industry and the broader macroeconomic turnaround. He stressed the need for innovation and sustainability in the industry which is a crucial cog in the economy adding that the government will ensure resuming capital works soon.

A serious problem faced by the construction industry is the shortage of skilled workers. Added to this, nearly 80% of the existing construction skilled workers do not possess a NVQ certification as they never followed a formal vocational training but gained the skill on the job. CCI to address this anomaly has commenced a program to award NVQ certificates by Recognizing the Prior Learning (RPL) in collaboration with the German Chamber of Skilled Crafts. At the exhibition inauguration, 20 No of certificates, successful welders, trainees and electricians will receive their certificates.

CCI Secretary General Eng. Nissanka N. Wijeratne noted that the 21st Build SL Expo occurs as the industry emerges from a four-year recession and added that there will be a big demand for construction services and materials and the exhibition is bound to have great success.

Sri Lanka’s construction industry is a major pillar of the national economy, historically generating substantial employment and contributing to GDP.

The industry experienced a strong recovery in 2025, expanding by 12.2% year-on-year in the third quarter and driving broader national GDP growth of 5.0% for the year. The rebound was supported by increased public infrastructure projects and a surge in material supplies, notably a 17.7% increase in cement.

The industry picked up momentum throughout the year, with the Construction Total Activity Index surging to a peak of 67.6 by September 2025—the highest level since late 2021.

To hold an exhibition of this magnitude when global uncertainty is at its peak due to the Middle East war that has triggered a sharp rise in commodity prices was hailed by exhibitors as a bold and brave move.

“We must not see only the dark cloud but the liver line in it and the opportunity in every challenge,” said an exhibitor.

The Build SL Housing and Construction International Exhibition is organized by the Chamber of Construction Industry of Sri Lanka, the apex body for all stakeholders in the construction sector which comprises contractors, engineers, architects, material suppliers, and consultants and serves as the central forum and collective voice to promote industry development and engage with government policymakers.

The construction sector exhibition gets bigger and better each year with over 3,000 products on display at this year’s event.

The construction sector chamber was incorporated by an Act of Parliament.

This year›s exhibition held under the theme ‘Realigning our construction for Tomorrow’ will conclude on Sunday.