Janashakthi Life cruising ahead, recording Rs 3.42 Bn Net Profit, with 67% growth in New Business in 2025

Janashakthi Life, a leading name in the insurance industry and a flagship brand of JXG (Janashakthi Group), announced strong financial performance for the year ended December 2025, with 67% growth in New Business, and 31% growth in total Gross written premiums recording Rs 8.65billion, endorsing credentials of a fast-growing insurer in the local insurance industry.

Company also recorded a strong bottom-line with a robust Profit Before Tax of Rs 3.95billion and Net Profit after Tax of Rs 3.42billion, showcasing the strong underwriting processes, prudent governance and efficient re-engineering of operational processes. Janashakthi also expanded its distribution channels and emphasised on digitization in the year 2025.

Company’s total assets grew by 6% to Rs 40.3billion, strengthening the Company’s balance sheet and providing a solid platform to support future growth. During 2025 claims and benefits, amounted to Rs 3.6billion, reflecting Janashakthi Life’s ongoing commitment to meeting policyholder obligations.

Commenting on the performance, Annika Senanayake, Chairperson of Janashakthi Insurance PLC, stated, “The 2025 financial performance reflects the strength of Janashakthi Life’s strategic positioning and disciplined financial management. Consistent premium growth, coupled with strong profitability and asset expansion, highlights the Company’s ability to create long-term value while maintaining a balanced and well-capitalised business.”

Commenting on the operational performance, Ravi Liyanage, Director / Chief Executive Officer of Janashakthi Insurance PLC, said, “The year 2025 performance was driven by focused execution across distribution, product innovation and portfolio management. The strong growth in new business and sustained profitability demonstrate the effectiveness of our operating model as we continue to scale responsibly and enhance customer value.”

Sri Lanka after IEEPA: Navigating tariffs in a volatile US trade environment

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.