Bonnie Tyler, known for hit song ‘Total Eclipse of the Heart,’ dies age 75

CNN - Welsh singer Bonnie Tyler, known for hits such as “Total Eclipse of the Heart,” has died at the age of 75, according to a statement on her website and social media accounts on Thursday.

“Bonnie’s family and team are heartbroken to announce that Bonnie unexpectedly passed away last night in hospital in Portugal as a result of the illness that she was being treated for,” the statement said.

“We will issue a further statement shortly but for now ask for privacy to deal with this tragedy,” it added.

Her death comes after the pop star, whose legal name is Gaynor Hopkins, underwent emergency intestinal surgery and was put into an induced coma, according to a statement posted to Tyler’s Facebook page in May.

A June 15 update said that the singer was “no longer in a coma” but remained “very unwell and in intensive care in hospital in Portugal.”

Tyler shot to fame in the 1980s, with “Total Eclipse of the Heart” topping the charts in the UK and the US.

Other popular songs of hers include “Holding Out For A Hero,” which featured in the 1984 movie “Footloose,” starring Kevin Bacon, as well as “It’s A Heartache” and “If You Were A Woman (And I Was A Man).”

Tyler was planning to return to the stage despite her recent ill health, with a number of dates scheduled later this year.

Welsh First Minister Rhun ap Iorwerth said he was “deeply saddened” to hear about Tyler’s death.

“Wales has lost a true icon, whose music brought joy to so many,” he said in a post on X.

“I extend my heartfelt condolences to her family, friends and fans across the world.”

“This is a very sad day… She was a legend, a total fireball and a great friend,” he wrote in a post on X alongside a photo of him with Tyler.

“Rest in peace bright eyes. You were meant to out live us all.”

Tyler’s career spanned decades. In 2013, she was selected as the UK’s entry to the Eurovision Song Contest.

Speaking to British newspaper the Daily Telegraph at the time, she said “it was a bit of a shock” to be chosen.

“It’s a bit political but let’s be realistic, 120 million people watch the Eurovision,” added Tyler.

Tyler was nominated for awards at both the Grammys and the Brits, and was made a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE), one of the UK’s most prestigious honors, in 2023 for services to music.