Russian Embassy hosts polling station for State Duma election

Colombo, Sep. 22 (Daily Mirror) - A polling station had been set up at the Russian Embassy in Colombo last Sunday for Russian nationals, particularly embassy staff members, to cast their ballots at the election to the State Duma, the Russian Parliament.

Russia had done it in its other embassies and consulates. The State Duma serves as the lower house of Russia’s Federal Assembly, the national parliament. It comprises 450 members elected for five-year terms.

Russian Ambassador Levan Dzhagaryan, who shared his views on the election conducted after four and a half years of war with Ukraine said it was very significant because it was the first elections conducted after the beginning of special military operation.

He expressed optimism that a major part of the Russian population would support the policy of his President to strengthen his country’s sovereignty and independence.

“We are ready to protect our values against threats and dangers coming from outside, first of all from European countries,” he said.

Asked whether they are concerned about the election, he said, “We feel that there are some attempts from outside to undermine the process, including hacker attacks against our internet infrastructure and intentions to create provocations. But we are on alert,”

“The main problem is the situation in the Russian regions close to the border with Ukraine, as well as the Donbass region, because they are under attack. The Ukrainian regime does not want to have elections in its own country. I would like to underline once again that the so-called President of Ukraine, Zelensky, is illegitimate because his tenure expired long ago.

They don't want to have elections, while at the same time they want to undermine elections in my country. All these attempts will fail,” he said.

Asked about transparency of the election process, he said, “We have many observers from many countries, including Sri Lanka. Observers from European countries, Africa, Latin America and Asia have come, and they are free to visit and attend polling stations. Transparency is provided 100 per cent.

By around 12 noon, 27 people had already visited the polling station. The vote, which began on Friday for 111 million eligible voters, ended Sunday. As predicted, the main party ‘United Russia’ emerged winner in this election. Russia wants the elections to showcase popular support for the war and legitimise its military action in Ukraine.