Colombo Gateway One future landmark shaping Port City Colombo’s skyline

Canary Wharf Holdings Ltd., based in Singapore, marked a major milestone on the 27 November 2025 with the successful announcement event of Colombo Gateway One to be developed within Port City Colombo, an extension of Colombo’s existing Central Business District. The event, held at Port City Colombo’s Sales Gallery, welcomed leading corporates and high-net- worth individuals reflecting strong investor interest and enthusiasm for the project.

Canary Wharf Holdings Project Development Director Mohsen Dehghan addressed the audience, emphasising the tower’s unique blue sapphire inspired geometry. He highlighted the full specifications and features, including its 34-storey structure built to international standards, 28 floors of Grade A office space, a highly efficient 1,080 m² typical floor plate, and six dedicated parking levels with a podium.

He noted that the shape of the typical floor allows any form of internal partitioning without obstructing the panoramic marina, ocean, and skyline views. These combined features, he stated, firmly establish Colombo Gateway One as the next-generation commercial landmark of Port City Colombo’s Financial District.

Colombo Port City Economic Commission Director General Revan Wickramasuriya addressed the audience on key regulatory frameworks, providing clarity and confidence for investors in the Special Economic Zone. His remarks highlighted the progressive, investor-friendly policies that continue to position Port City Colombo as a world-class business and services hub.

KPMG Principal, Head of Advisory, and Deputy Head of Markets Shiluka Goonewardene presented an independent feasibility evaluation, reaffirming the project’s strong commercial fundamentals and long-term viability.

million, with an attractive projected rental yield of 7.3% with expectations of gradual uplift over time. Early interest from Authorised Persons (APs) and Businesses of Strategic Importance (BSI) highlights robust demand and the growing momentum within Port City Colombo.

The strong turnout and engagement at the announcement event reinforce Port City Colombo’s vision of establishing South Asia’s next major business and lifestyle gateway.