Of that mansion grab

A group of undergraduates seized what remains of a mansion that belongs to the State, in Malwana, on Thursday. They represent the new Inter University Students Federation (IUSF), created by the JVP-NPP government as a counter to the original IUSF controlled by the breakaway JVP group, the Frontline Socialist Party (FSP). The protesters’ JVP links became clear from the subservient manner in which the police behaved.

It was alleged after the 2015 regime change that the Malwana Mansion belonged to Basil Rajapaksa, but that allegation could not be proved in court. Nobody claimed ownership of the house, which the court subsequently vested in the state.

The pro-government student union is desperate to outshine the original IUSF, and therefore needs media attention. Thursday’s mansion grab can therefore be considered a publicity stunt aimed at having university students believe that the government-controlled IUSF is doing something for them. The JVP may also have sought to use the incident to distract attention from the ongoing controversy over a palatial house built by a minister who claimed, during the 2024 election campaign, that he was struggling to make ends meet.

It will be interesting to see the government’s reaction to the forcible occupation of the Malwana Mansion. The protesters are demanding that the sprawling house, which was damaged by goons during the violent phase of  Aragalaya in 2022 be repaired urgently and handed over to a university. Chances are that their demand will be granted so that both the government and its student wing can score political points.

On Friday, the police, who are notorious for resorting to disproportionate force to crush protests, at the drop of a hat, behaved for once. They pretended to resist the protesters’ efforts to enter the property, and what was described as a scuffle by a section of the media looked more like a friendly Kabaddi match. Unsurprisingly, the police gave in, and the students overran the house. They were there at the time of going to press. They don’t have to worry about legal action or a police crackdown, for the government supporters are above the law. They can grab others’ properties, park buses in undesignated areas on expressways and even carry out scams, causing staggering losses to the state, with total impunity.

If the CID cannot so much as trace the owner of a palatial house abandoned after a regime change, how can it be considered equal to the task of finding out the masterminds behind the Easter Sunday terror attacks? Unlike the herb-bearing mountain Hanuman brought here from the Himalayas, according to  Ramayana, the Malwana Mansion was built over a period of time, and it is a shame that the police and other investigators have failed to find out its owner.

Thursday’s incident at Malwana reminds us of how a group of JVP cadres, led by a couple of NPP MPs, seized an FSP office at Yakkala last year, with the police looking the other way. The violent mob assaulted the FSP members and produced what they claimed to be the copy of a judicial order that permitted them to occupy the office. The police accepted their claim unquestioningly and went so far as to put up barricades near the disputed office to protect the JVP cadres. A case was filed, and the Gampaha Magistrate’s Court ruled that the FSP could occupy the party office.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake never misses an opportunity to claim that his government has restored the rule of law, and nobody is above the law. He repeated this claim the other day in Matale. But his party members are free to violate the law in full view of the police. No action has been taken against the JVP cadres and MPs who committed a serious offence by seizing the property of another political party and furnishing a bogus document to mislead the police. So much for the new political culture that the JVP/NPP promised to usher in.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.