Science of the mind

Religion, perhaps, is the most important invention of the human mind. It is said that there are more religions in the world than spoken languages! According to Ethnologue, a website considered to be an authoritative catalogue of languages, there are around 7,170 living languages, grouped into about 142 language families, the Indo-European family having the most speakers. English is the most widely spoken language and around 40% of languages are considered endangered as there are less than 1,000 speakers each. Depending on the way ‘religion’ is defined, the number of religions in the world range anywhere from 4000 to 10,000, though the top four make up for 76%: Christianity 30%, Islam 25%, Hinduism 15% and Buddhism 6%.

However, religion is far from being the greatest invention of the human mind. Though many religions advocate all that is good including tolerance, compassion and kindness, in practice religion has become very divisive, led to many wars and spread discord. On the other hand, though language can be used to spread hatred, an ever-increasing phenomenon associated with the advent of social media, overall, human culture and civilization has been built on the foundation of language. It is hard to imagine human civilization without language though one can well imagine a civilization thriving without religion. Has religion which was meant to be the ‘Rose’ of civilization become a ‘Thorn’?

A vast majority of Buddhists are content with the concept of Buddhism being a religion, continuing their practices with emphasis on the ritual, but ‘thinking’ Buddhists rightly question whether more harm than good has been done to the teachings of the Buddha by the envelope of religion. Going by the widely accepted definitions of religion such as “the belief in and the worship of superhuman power or powers, especially a god or gods” or “a particular system of faith or worship” or “a pursuit of interest followed with great devotion”, perhaps, it is only the third that may be used, though loosely, to categorise Buddhism as a religion, as in Buddhism there is no belief in a supernatural power and there is no place for acceptance based purely on faith.

Maybe, the Buddha Dhamma is better classified as a philosophy, and it can be argued that the teachings of the Buddha may have had wider recognition and acceptance had the Buddha been born in the West than in India and recognised more as a philosopher than a religious leader. Going by the definitions of philosophy “the study of the fundamental nature of knowledge, reality and existence, especially when considered as an academic discipline” or “a theory or attitude that acts as a guiding principle for behaviour” it is obvious that Buddhism is much more than that.

Perhaps, the recognition of Buddhism as a religion rather than a philosophy was advantageous, in a way. As a religion, an art and culture around Buddhism developed with myriads of religious artefacts dotting around the world, especially in the East. However, it may be argued that this is not what the Buddha would have wished for. Notwithstanding, among the many monuments that are a testimony to the creative genius of our ancestors, standing tall are Ruwanmeliseya, built in 140 BCE by King Dutugemunu and Jetavanaramaya, built by King Mahasena and completed around 301 CE, which are among the ten tallest structures in the ancient world. Jetavanaramaya, built with over 93 million bricks to a height of 400 feet, was the third largest man-made structure on earth, second only to the two Great Pyramids in Giza and still holds the Guinness record for the tallest stupa ever built. It is a great shame that so little is talked about this engineering marvel of the ancient world.

The Buddha commands my respect more as a scientist; as the pioneer who laid the foundation for the modern scientific method. Kalama Sutta laid the foundation for scientific thought, verification before acceptance. Whereas other religious leaders were representatives of a higher power and their word must be accepted on faith, the Buddha encouraged his followers to question before conviction. The Four Noble Truths forms the basis on which scientific questions are addressed even today. Buddha’s concepts of cause and effect, impermanence which is dynamic flux are very scientific. The Middle Path is shown to be a cornerstone of political science.

Mindfulness, a concept the Buddha introduced, is fast gathering momentum as a therapeutic modality and Mindfulness Meditation has spread across the world thanks to the efforts of Satya Narayan Goenka. His Holiness Dalai Lama’s dynamism has stimulated many scientists to prove Buddhist concepts by modern scientific methods. When Richard J Davidson, Professor of Psychology and Psychiatry at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, who had done research on the effects of meditation on the brain at the behest of the Dalai lama, invited him to participate in the “Neuroscience and Society” programme of the Society for Neuroscience meeting in 2005, over 500 researchers signed a petition in protest. They alleged that his closeness to the Dalai Lama may influence the results, but the controversy subsided as most of the scientists who attended the meeting valued the presentation by the Dalai Lama. It later turned out that many of the scientists who protested were Chinese. Even science is not spared by politics!

Robert Wright, an American writer with an interest in evolutionary psychology, has written a New York Times bestseller, titled “Why Buddhism Is True”, with the subtitle “The Science and Philosophy of Meditation and Enlightenment” commented in Wikipedia as follows:

Wright investigates a secular, Westernised form of Buddhism focusing on the practice of mindfulness meditation and stripped of the element of reincarnation. He believes Buddhism’s diagnosis of the causes of human suffering is largely vindicated by evolutionary biology and evolutionary psychology, justifying his book’s title. He further argues that the modern psychological idea of the modularity of mind resonates with the Buddhist teaching of no-self (anatman)”

The Buddha’s analysis of the mind and thought processes remains unsurpassed. His analysis of sensory perceptions seems far superior to scientific explanations. Although modern science recognises only five senses, the Buddha considered the mind as the sixth sense. Scientific observations confirm that what we see is what we want to see and what we hear is what we want to hear etc. It looks as if the mind acts as a modifier sense. Further, Out-of-Body Experiences, described in detail by some who have had Near Death Experiences, makes one wonder whether the mind can see without the eye and hear without the ear. Mindfulness, through meditation, seems the best way of controlling the mind.

Buddhism, in addition to many other things, is the Science of the Mind.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.