“Big boss or boss’s son - It doesn’t matter” - President

Colombo, Sep. 13 (Daily Mirror) - President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has pledged to continue an uncompromising crackdown on corruption, drug trafficking and organized crime, while outlining a series of development and welfare measures for rural communities.

Addressing a National People’s Power (NPP) rally in Nochchiyagama, the President said there were no political threats facing his government and that the rallies were aimed at building a strong public movement to transform the country’s economic, social and political systems.

He said the mandate received by the NPP on September 21, 2024, had brought an end to traditional political practices, including VIP privileges, excessive security arrangements and dynastic politics.

President Dissanayake said that law enforcement and investigative institutions had been given the independence necessary to carry out their duties without political interference.

“A small, primitive group of people says, ‘It’s okay if they stole, but don’t send them to prison.’ Is there such a thing? Should we allow that? No, remember that. Some people still say, ‘Our thief is good for us.’ That small, remaining group is all that is left.

“Those who go after corrupt people, those who say corrupt individuals should not be punished, and those who say they should not be sent to prison—they are not everywhere. They represent only a tiny fraction of the country.

“As the President, I am standing here blindfolded. I don’t see who the thief is; it is not relevant to me. Who the corrupt person is—it is not relevant to me. Is he a big boss, the boss’s son, the boss’s wife or the boss’s mother-in-law? Does that matter to us?

“Since it does not matter to us, we have blindfolded ourselves and given authority to the investigative institutions. Today, those institutions have been made independent, empowered and provided with the necessary facilities. Blindfolded, we have given them the necessary protection to take action against the corrupt,” he said.

Responding to calls from the opposition to place limits on corruption investigations, he said the government would not impose restrictions on investigations into corrupt politicians, drug networks or underworld groups.

"About seven or eight months ago, people asked, 'Why aren't you arresting anyone?' They asked, 'Where are the file caches you talked about?' Now what are they asking? I saw a former minister saying that there should be a limit to arresting thieves. Is there a limit to arresting thieves? No, catching thieves is unlimited," the President said.

He said that no individual would be protected because of political status or position and that investigations would continue regardless of who was involved.

Turning to development in the North Central Province, the President highlighted several major infrastructure projects. He said more than Rs. 50 billion had been allocated for the Kebithigollewa water project, while over Rs. 47 billion had been allocated for the Lower Malwathu Oya reservoir project.

He also said the government had allocated Rs. 18.5 billion for the purchase of paddy.