Ceylon Chamber affirms support for recovery efforts following Cyclone Ditwah

Summit to focus on recovery, resilience and investment priorities as private sector mobilises support for rebuilding communities, livelihoods

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce issuing a statement yesterday expressed its condolences to those affected by Cyclone Ditwah and expressed its commitment to the recovery.

It also said the Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit will proceed today in a scaled-back format, as The Ceylon Chamber shifts all social-event funding to Cyclone Ditwah relief. The Chamber says the Summit will focus on recovery, resilience, and investment priorities as the private sector mobilises support for rebuilding communities and livelihoods.

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce is deeply saddened by the devastation caused by Cyclone Ditwah, and our thoughts are with all individuals, families, and communities affected by this tragedy. We mourn the loss of lives and acknowledge the immense hardship endured by thousands who have been displaced and whose livelihoods have been severely disrupted. In the wake of this national crisis, the Chamber, together with the generous support of our members, has been working closely with Government agencies to coordinate urgent relief efforts. The unwavering resilience of Sri Lankans is evident in moments such as these. It is a pivotal time for the nation to come together, pooling our collective strength to restore lives, livelihoods, and stability.

The Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit was originally designed as a platform to advance economic growth and investment. In light of recent events, its purpose has taken on even greater meaning. The Summit now serves as an essential forum to collectively reflect on the road to recovery, discuss strategies to strengthen national resilience, and reaffirm our shared commitment to rebuilding a stronger and more stable Sri Lanka. Our priority is to support the country’s recovery and the restoration of communities and livelihoods. The private sector has a critical role to play in this effort, and we remain steadfast in mobilising our networks and resources to contribute meaningfully to long-term resilience and sustainable development.

Whilst recognising the current situation, the Chamber has decided to proceed with the Summit without any social events, and will donate all funds originally allocated for such activities to support relief efforts. We believe that continuing with the Summit in this revised format is essential to fostering the collaboration, investment, and policy dialogue needed to drive an effective and inclusive recovery.

We call upon all participants, Chamber members, and the public to join us in this collective national effort. Together, we can turn this moment of adversity into a powerful opportunity for renewal, resilience, and long-term progress for Sri Lanka.