Let sanity prevail

Sri Lanka’s education sector is rarely in the news for the right reasons. It is perennially in turmoil and characterised by countless problems and clashes. Thankfully, the Education Ministry has walked back its controversial decision to extend the school day by half an hour. It is reported to have cited transport problems caused by recent disasters as the reason for the reversal of its decision. However, it is determined to go ahead with its education reforms amidst vehement protests from teachers, principals and other stakeholders.

The general consensus is that the education system in this country needs to be reformed, but the NPP government made a huge mistake by rushing to prepare education reforms without consulting other stakeholders and trying to shove them down the throats of principals, teachers and students. It should have adopted a conciliatory approach.

A stock excuse the government gives for its failure to fulfil its election promises is that one year is not sufficient for it to deliver on its campaign pledges, but it has formulated education reforms in double-quick time! There is no way the government can implement education reforms successfully without the cooperation of teachers and principals. Hence it should make a serious effort to secure their support.

All governments with supermajorities become impervious to reason and seek to bulldoze their way through. The NPP administration has failed to be different. It may have thought that it would be able to wear down the warring teachers’ unions by sticking to its guns. But the education sector trade unionists have proved that they are made of sterner stuff. They have warned that they will bring the government to its knees if it tries to force them into submission.

Schools have faced numerous disruptions during the past several years due to the Covid-19 pandemic, extreme weather events, etc. A strike in the education sector is the last thing the country needs at this juncture. A showdown between the education sector trade unions and the government must therefore be averted by any means.

When the government announced its decision to introduce education reforms, we argued that it had to engage all stakeholders, and heed the oxymoronic Latin adage—festina lente (‘make haste slowly’). Many experts in the field of education urged it to tread cautiously lest its reform project should run into resistance and fail. But the government chose to set about the vital task in a slapdash manner. The ongoing controversy over an adult content website mentioned in an English language module for Grade Six points to an inordinate haste on the part of those who formulated education reforms. This issue has left both the proponents and opponents of education reforms expounding conspiracy theories.

The proposed education reforms have been politicised to such an extent that they are now a political issue, which the Opposition is using as a bludgeon to beat the government. This situation could have been avoided if the processes of formulating education reforms had been made inclusive.

There is no shame in heeding dissenting views and making course corrections. Flexibility is not a sign of weakness. It is a hallmark of responsible governance. The government ought to put its education reform package on hold, and get all stakeholders around the table for an extensive discussion on it. A timeframe for education reforms must not be determined politically.

Independent educationists have provided valuable insights into the ongoing debate on education reforms. They are adept at designing learning systems, developing teaching approaches and influencing educational practices and policies to improve learning experiences and outcomes. The views of these experts, principals and teachers must be taken on board when education reforms are prepared.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.