Fallen SLAF pilot Siyambalapitiya posthumously promoted to rank of Group Captain

University of Colombo confers Siyambalapitiya Masters in International Relations degree posthumously

The commanding pilot of the Bell 212 helicopter Wing Commander Nirmal Siyambalapitiya, who sacrificed his life at the Lunawa incident while engaged in emergency relief efforts, has been posthumously promoted to the rank of Group Captain by the Sri Lanka Air Force (SLAF).

With another pilot and three other airmen, he was engaged in delivering essential supplies including food and dry rations to families hit by floods under critical weather conditions but had to make an emergency landing near the Lunuwila Bridge on 30 November.

The SLAF said in a statement that his exemplary service and dedication to duty are honoured with the highest respect.

Wing Commander Siyambalapitiya, a highly experienced pilot with over 3,000 flying hours during his distinguished career, according to SLAF sources, had to do the emergency landing but all his attempts for a safe landing failed due to people standing on the bridge videoing the incident.

With the assistance of residents, all injured SLAF crew members, who fell into the river, were evacuated and taken to the Marawila Base Hospital but Wing Commander Siyambalapitiya succumbed to his injuries.

The Co-Pilot and three other crew members survived and are currently receiving medical care.

Following the directives of SLAF Commander Air Marshal Bandu Edirisinghe, a Board of Inquiry has been appointed to investigate the incident.

Meanwhile, the University of Colombo (UoC) has announced today that he has been conferred the Master degree in International Relations, today.

The UoC has stated in its Facebook that it was with profound sorrow that it announced the passing of Wing Commander Siyabalapitiya, a distinguished member of the MA in International Relations (2023/2024) program at the University of Colombo.

“Wing Commander Siyabalapitiya made the supreme sacrifice in the line of national duty. In recognition of his academic dedication and service to the nation, the University will confer his degree posthumously”, it has stated.

Group Captain Siyambalapitiya’s remains was taken to his residence in Ratmalana yesterday evening and final rites will be conducted with full Air Force honours on 4 December.