SriLankan Airlines: Bringing India closer to Sri Lanka

SriLankan Airlines unveiled strategic initiatives aimed at enhancing connectivity between India and Sri Lanka while further strengthening the time-honoured bond between the two nations at a special press conference in Delhi, India, alongside SATTE 2026, South Asia’s leading travel and tourism exhibition. The event also spotlighted new destination launches and provided a platform to engage with Indian media, central to increasing awareness in this vital market.

SriLankan has long made it a mission to bring India closer to Sri Lanka and the world. With close to 90 weekly flights between the two countries, and more to come, the airline has never been more energised about setting the pace for India’s expanding global footprint. SriLankan proudly counts India as its largest market, accounting for nearly 30% of the airline’s total passenger traffic and 23% of overall visitor arrivals to the island.

As 2026 unfolds, SriLankan Airlines plans to increase its weekly India services, currently covering Chennai, Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad, Bengaluru, Kochi, Trivandrum, Madurai and Tiruchirappalli. The airline has consistently focused on serving both major metropolitan centres and emerging markets across India, extending its reach to underserved cities. Soon joining this network as SriLankan’s tenth Indian destination will be Ahmedabad. The airline has consistently focused on serving both major metropolitan centres and emerging markets across India, extending its reach to underserved cities.

With the addition of Ahmedabad, SriLankan Airlines will serve six of India’s eight major metropolitan hubs, further diversifying its India portfolio and boosting route economics by capitalising on year-round demand and strong cultural ties between the two countries.

People’s Bank achieves historic LKR 40.2 billion profit; group assets surge

NDB reports all-time high earnings; doubles PAT on a normalised basis

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.