Next IMF programme depends on macro economic stability

Colombo, Sep. 30 (Daily Mirror) - Amidst uncertainty about the Government’s next move after the current IMF (International Monetary Fund) programme with politicians across the divide expressing different views, an IMF spokesperson said the international lender’s focus is to bring the current arrangement to the finishing line, and if there is any such request for a fresh one, it will be considered only after assessment of macroeconomic stability and balance-of-payments need.

In response to a query by the Daily Mirror regarding talks about another IMF programme , the spokesperson said still two reviews remain under the ongoing EFF(Extended Fund Facility) arrangement, which is in place through March, next year.

“Hence, the immediate priority should be on getting the current programme to the finish line,” the spokesperson said.

According to the spokesperson, it is ultimately a decision for the Sri Lankan authorities to decide whether another programme is needed, but as of now a formal request has not been forwarded for a successor arrangement.

Referring to the procedure in such a case, the spokesperson said, “Typically, when an IMF member country formally expresses interest in a new arrangement, IMF staff and the authorities work closely to assess the macroeconomic situation, determine whether a balance-of-payments need exists, and discuss program design accordingly. Once staff-level agreement is reached on a new arrangement, approval of the IMF Executive Board would be needed,”

An IMF team led by Evan Papageorgiou visited Sri Lanka during September 10-23, 2026, to discuss (i) recent macroeconomic developments and progress in implementing economic and financial policies under the EFF arrangement, and (ii) policy recommendations.

He, at the end of the mission, said, “Sri Lanka’s economy has proved remarkably resilient to successive shocks. Economic activity expanded by 4.2 percent in 2026Q2, marking eleven consecutive quarters of strong growth. While headline inflation rose to 8 percent y/y in August due to the global oil price shock, expectations are broadly anchored. Gross official reserves have increased, reaching US$6.9 billion at the end-August 2026. Banks remain well capitalized and profitable. Fiscal outturn in 2026H1 was strong and debt restructuring is largely completed.

However, he said that Sri Lanka continues to face downside risks from uncertainty over the duration and intensity of the Middle East war, global trade policy, and the impact of El Niño. Safeguarding macroeconomic stability in a shock-prone environment requires unwavering commitment to prudent policies and reforms to rebuild fiscal and external buffers, maintain price stability, and advance the governance agenda while strengthening social safety nets to protect the most vulnerable, according to the IMF press release which was issued later.