CA Sri Lanka launches Faculty of Business Law and Regulatory Compliance to build legally proficient Chartered Accountants

Recognising the rapidly expanding role of Chartered Accountants in governance, regulatory compliance, and corporate integrity, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (CA Sri Lanka)  last week launched the Faculty of Business Law and Regulatory Compliance.

The faculty was officially launched by CA Sri Lanka President Tishan Subasinghe, in the presence of Vice President Anoji De Silva; Business Law and Regulatory Compliance Committee Chairman Laknath Jayawickrema, Alternate Chairman Sanath Wijesinghe; Council Members, and Chief Executive Officer Lakmali Priyangika.

The primary objective of the new faculty is to provide strategic direction and professional guidance for the development and continuous improvement of programs at the CA Business School. It aims to support members in expanding their professional expertise beyond traditional finance roles, focusing on four critical pillars; Business Law Integration, Regulatory Compliance Management, Financial Investigations, and Dispute Resolution Expertise, including arbitration, mediation, and conciliation.

Through this initiative, CA Sri Lanka seeks to equip Chartered Accountants to adapt to increasingly complex regulatory environments while reinforcing their role as trusted professionals contributing to transparency, accountability, ethical business practices and public trust.

Speaking at the event, Subasinghe underscored why legal and regulatory fluency is no longer optional, but a necessity for modern accountants. “In today’s technologically driven and highly regulated world, the role of the Chartered Accountant is undergoing a profound transformation.”

Subasinghe highlighted that the profession is moving beyond the traditional realms of bookkeeping and financial reporting. “Today, a Chartered Accountant must be a strategic guardian of integrity, equally proficient in navigating complex business laws and regulatory frameworks as they are in finance. The launch of this Faculty is a direct response to this shift. It is about building legally aware, compliance-ready professionals who can uphold the highest standards of governance and serve as trusted advisors in an era where ethical compliance is the bedrock of sustainable business,” he added.

The launch of the faculty was followed by an inaugural awareness session and panel discussion titled “Navigating the Alternative Dispute Resolution Landscape: A Strategic Imperative for Corporate Sri Lanka.”

The session featured insightful presentations by former Justice of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka and member of the Judicial Service Commission Justice Shiranee Thilakawardane, Justice of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka Justice A. H. M. Dilip Nawaz, and Attorney-at-Law, Legal Consultant and Arbitrator Janaka Basuriya.

Former Supreme Court Justice Shiranee Tilakawardane (centre) and Attorney-at-Law, Legal Consultant, and Arbitrator Janaka Basuriya (right) during the panel discussion

CA Sri Lanka President Tishan Subasinghe launching the new faculty