CBSL sees no immediate need to curb vehicle imports; reserves above $7bn provide buffer

The need has not yet arisen to curb vehicle imports to Sri Lanka, Central Bank Governor Nandalal Weerasinghe said yesterday following the latest monetary policy review.

Responding to a question from the media during the Q&A session, Weerasinghe said the Central Bank of Sri Lanka was closely monitoring developments before considering any such measure.

He noted that foreign remittance inflows have not been affected so far despite the ongoing war in the Middle East. In fact, remittances have slightly increased as overseas Sri Lankans appear to be sending more money home amid the prevailing uncertainty.

However, tourism earnings have declined due to the current situation, while export data for the latest period are yet to be received.

“If consumption in Sri Lanka’s export markets is affected by changes in consumer behaviour in those countries, we could expect some decline in export earnings,” the Governor said.

Despite the uncertainties, he said Sri Lanka’s foreign reserves – currently exceeding USD 7 billion – provide a stronger buffer for the country’s balance of payments compared with the situation during the Sri Lankan economic crisis in 2022.

Dr. Weerasinghe said the government would also study the complexities of the evolving global situation and take appropriate action to minimise potential adverse impacts.

“Our monetary policy has been formulated based on several key assumption scenarios. No one can predict when the war will end and build a monetary model around that,” he said.

“What we have done instead is develop prudent scenario assessments and design monetary policy in a way that allows the economy to withstand potential adverse consequences in the best possible manner.”

The Governor also said that no businesses have so far requested loan moratoria due to hardships arising from global uncertainty. “Up to now we have not seen such concerns from enterprises,” Dr. Weerasinghe said, noting that the financial system has not yet experienced stress from companies seeking repayment relief.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.