Autobahn Traders embraces digital strategy to optimize customer service

Autobahn Traders (Pvt) Ltd, a respected name in the import and distribution of brand-new BMW vehicle spare parts, has embraced a digital-first transformation strategy to enhance operational efficiency and deliver optimized customer care and service to fleet owners and individual customers in this discerning segment.

Now in its 8th year as a trusted partner in automotive spare parts, Autobahn Traders has achieved a rapid, oneyear rollout of the Odoo ERP system. This implementation boosts efficiency and inventory accuracy, two essential pillars for serving BMW workshops, garage owners, and passionate BMW vehicle owners. The parts are imported through authorized channels from different parts of the world, including Germany, the UK, Turkey, Singapore, India, China, Malaysia, etc

“Our strategy to pursue a digital-first transformation reflects our commitment to always providing the best services to our customers. Given the complexity of auto spare parts, real-time, accurate part identification, availability, and cost-reflective competitive price communication are considered extremely important in our line of trade. Hence, the deployment of the ERP system to facilitate the transformation was critical to maintaining our service levels at a time of growth,” said Ushlah Aluthge, Operations Director, Autobahn Traders (Pvt) Ltd.

As stated by the Managing Director, Hasith Senarathne, to further enhance the value of the transformation in terms of process efficiency and productivity, Autobahn Traders (Pvt) Ltd will complete the implementation of the 5S methodology over the next three months and is already working towards ISO certification for quality excellence.

Stating that Autobahn Traders is fully focused on technology, leadership, and sustainable growth, both Directors emphasized that strong commitment and leadership enabled the successful ERP deployment and business growth. Autobahn Traders operates with a 99.9% female workforce, promoting women’s empowerment while encouraging continuous staff development to support the future growth trajectory.

With Senarathne’s background of over 18 years in banking, financial services, and strategy, and Mrs. Aluthge’s background, with over 18 years of expertise in sales, IT, and ERP, leading the digital transformation, the directors of Autobahn Traders bring over 35 years of combined expertise to lead the company to its next phase of business growth.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.