NGO Bill: some provisions inconsistent with right to freedom of association under international law

Oct. 3 (Daily Mirror) - UN Special Rapporteurs, working on human rights, freedom of opinion and expression while countering terrorism and fundamental rights, have expressed concern that some provisions of the Non-governmental Organisations (Registration and Supervision) Bill 2026 are not consistent with the right to freedom of association under international human rights law, as well as international standards concerning terrorist financing.

They informed the government of this in writing on September 28, 2026. The Bill was first published in 2024, reportedly with no consultation with civil society or the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka. The Bill has undergone successive drafts, with the latest version in June 2026 and including new provisions on the monitoring of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) for compliance with counter-terrorism financing and anti-money laundering standards. The Bill is reportedly part of Sri Lanka’s efforts to ensure compliance with international counter-terrorist financing standards, in advance of the country’s mutual evaluation by the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering (a Financial Action Task Force (FATF)-Style Regional Body) planned for October 2026. It is intended to replace the Voluntary Social Services Organisations Act 1980. The current Bill is undergoing restricted stakeholder consultations in Sri Lanka, according to the letter.

Under the Bill, all NGOs will be required to register with the Competent Authority (section 8), and it would constitute an offence to fail to register (section 19), prohibiting the existence of unregistered groups. Directors and office bearers of a body corporate also bear criminal liability (section 20). A registration certificate would be valid for three years (section 10) and accordingly would need to be renewed for an NGO to continue. No time period is specified for a registration or renewal decision, but NGOs may not commence activities until registration is granted.

The Bill additionally allows the Competent Authority to require registration of a voluntary social service activity or project where it is non-religious in nature or outside the body’s constitutional objects. Once registered, obligations under section 15(2)(a)-(m) apply (see below), thus bringing otherwise exempt bodies within the regulatory regime and exposing civic, charitable, or advocacy activity to control even where the parent body itself remains exempt.

The Bill imposes numerous obligations on NGOs, including to “align with the policies of the government”; “not engage in any activity that adversely affect sovereignty or territorial integrity of Sri Lanka or violates the provisions of the Constitution”; “not induce or cause to induce any public disorder which affect safety and interests of the general public”; not to “engage in any advocacy to support political ideologies using funds and resources of the non-governmental organisation during a period of pre-election or, unless it is an object of such non-governmental organisation”; to “utilise fund of the non-governmental organisation only for the purposes it was registered”; and to “notify the Competent Authority prior to initiation of any crowd funding activity” (section 15). There are also obligations to act in conformity with instructions from the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (section 15(2)(h)) and to disclose certain funds and account details (section 5(i)), extending State financial control.

“We are concerned that the Bill’s requirements for registering NGOs and, in some cases, activities and projects, and associated penalties (including director and office bearer liabilities for bodies corporate, which reverse the burden of proof), are inconsistent with the principle that associations do not need any domestic authorisation or recognition in order to fall under the protection of the right to freedom of association (Human Rights Committee, draft general comment No. 38, paras. 13, 30 and 43). We recall Human Rights Council resolution 22/6, which calls upon States to ensure that “procedures governing the registration of civil society organisations exist, that these are transparent, accessible, non-discriminatory, expeditious and inexpensive, allow for the possibility to appeal and avoid requiring re-registration, in accordance with national legislation, and are in conformity with international human rights law (para. 8),” they wrote.

The letter has been signed by Ben Saul, Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.

Leopoldo Maldonado Gutiérrez, Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, Gina Romero, Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, Andrea Bolaños Vargas, Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders.