India unveils future of South Asia’s construction industry

South Asia’s largest construction equipment exhibition began December 9 in Bangalore, India showcasing a broad range of next-generation machinery and technologies. Equipment and tools demonstrated improved productivity, advanced controls, energy-efficiency, telematics integration, IoT-enabled monitoring and predictive maintenance. These innovations support better project outcomes across roads, highways, rail, and metro. Sea ports. Airports, mining and development.

The event stands as a platform for collaboration, knowledge exchange and business engagement. It brings together stakeholders who are shaping India’s transition towards infrastructure that is smarter, greener and aligned with global standards.

“India continues to strengthen its position as one of the world’s most dynamic growth engines supported by decisive policy direction and a renewed national focus on infrastructure” said Rajiv Memani President Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) at the inauguration of EXCON 13th edition held at Bangalore International Exhibition Centre, Bengaluru. Memani further stated that as investment expands across transportation, logistics, urban development and manufacturing, EXCON 2025 becomes a vital platform to showcase how industry and innovation are shaping this momentum.

Speaking at the inauguration R Mukundan President designate CII and Chairman EXCON 2025 noted that ‘’India is on a historic growth trajectory aiming to become a $30 trillion economy by 2047 under the Viksit Bharat vision and Infrastructure will be the backbone of this transformation with INR 11.21 lakh crore allocated for Financial Year 2025/26. Projects such as Bharatmala, high-speed rail and Smart Cities under PM Gati Shakti are driving connectivity and urban development.” He said Excon supports this by bringing innovators, policymakers and industry leaders together to introduce automation, IoT, AI-driven machinery and green technologies to improve execution and competitiveness. He added, “Every edition sets benchmarks and will continue to empower stakeholders and drive modernisation.”

“EXCON 2025 stands as a testament to India’s growing engineering excellence and global aspirations. As we embrace new technologies and sustainable practices, the Indian construction industry is poised shape the infrastructure landscape of tomorrow” said Deepak Shetty, President ICEMA and CEO/MD JCB India Ltd.

“The exhibition brings together Industry leaders, policy makers and innovators of South Asia to highlight the crucial role of advanced technologies, manufacturing strength and green practices in shaping the national growth as we move in to a new era of infrastructure” said Chandrajith Banerjee, Director General, CII.

Over one million business visitors are expected during this period. Over 1250 exhibitors display a wide range of construction equipment from across the world with 7 country pavilions from China, France, Germany, Italy, South Korea, Turkey and the United Kingdome. They showcase a wide spectrum of global construction technologies and equipment solutions. The presence of these pavilions reinforces EXCON’s role as a bridge between global innovation and South India infrastructure goals.

OTR Lanka and Laugfs Corporation (Rubber) Ltd took part as trade partners from Sri Lanka.

Event was sponsored by well reputed brands such as; AJAX, BKT, CATERPILLAR, conmar, JCB, KOBELCO, KOMATSU, MRCRUSHING IT, PUZZOLONA, RMX, SANY, SCHWING Stetter, TATA HITACHI, VENUS, ACE, Apollo, ARX, Bobcat, EMERALD, HAIL STONE. HYUNDAI, MAHAVEER DISTRIBUTORS, Parker, VELVEX, walavoil, wipro and WIRTGEN GROUP.

The government is taking steps to streamline trade facilitation, customs processes, investment approvals, and improving export facilities – Prime Minister

CHEC South Asia & Southeast Asia completes emergency clearing of A5 Highway

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.