UN Peacebuilding Week highlights role of inclusive public service in building peace

Public sector officials, community members and development partners recently came together for Stories that Connect, an interactive dialogue event organised by the United Nations in Sri Lanka to mark United Nations Public Service Day.

Held as part of United Nations Peacebuilding Week, the event highlighted how sustainable peace is built not only through formal agreements and policies, but also through everyday interactions that foster trust, understanding and a sense of belonging. In Sri Lanka, where efforts to strengthen reconciliation and social cohesion continue, creating opportunities for people to listen to one another, engage across differences and participate in decisions that affect their lives can help strengthen relationships between communities and institutions.

Inspired by the Human Library concept, the event created a space for participants to engage directly with stories of lived experience, personal journeys and reflections on public service and inclusion. Through open conversations and diverse perspectives, participants explored how empathy and dialogue can help bridge divides, challenge assumptions and deepen understanding and respect.

The event featured public servants, community leaders and civil society representatives from across Sri Lanka, including Chaminda Hettiarachchi of the Department of Pensions, Chameesha De Silva of the Department of Posts, Samali Wathsala Kulathunga of the Grama Niladhari Service, Kithsiri from the Gampaha District Administration, Rubadharshan from the Ministry of Plantation and Community Infrastructure, community representatives Niojini Vinayagam, Anne Subadara Peries and Shiroma Namali, and V. Anthones of the Uva Workers Development Foundation. Through their stories and experiences, they offered unique perspectives on the challenges and opportunities of building more inclusive and connected communities.

Stories that Connect forms part of the Social Dialogue for Peace and Crisis Prevention Project, implemented in partnership with the Ministry of Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Local Government through ILO, UNESCO and UNFPA. The project supports efforts to strengthen dialogue and participation, helping create stronger connections between communities and institutions as a foundation for lasting peace. The project is supported by the UN Sri Lanka SDG Fund, with contributions from Canada, the United Kingdom, the European Union, the Joint SDG Fund and the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund.

Sri Lanka is one of many countries participating in the first-ever United Nations Peacebuilding Week, a global initiative marking 20 years since the establishment of the UN Peacebuilding architecture. The week celebrates progress made in supporting countries to prevent conflict and sustain peace, while highlighting the role of dialogue, participation and trust in building more peaceful, inclusive and resilient societies.