Value of syncretic education

I am honoured and humbled to receive the honorary degree of Doctor of Letters from this most prestigious institution University of Peradeniya. I am grateful to the University, the Faculty of Dental Science and all others involved in the procedure. University of Peradeniya with its breathtaking beauty and rich culture, is one of the greatest centres of learning. It was a privilege, indeed, to be a student of this University and then to serve it as a teacher. I will never be able to repay what I owe this University, however much I may serve it.

A university, above all, must be, a centre of training, a centre of research and a centre of culture, integrated into one conglomerate. Training, research and culture are the vital ingredients that make a university great. University of Peradeniya, by and large, fulfil these requirements to a significant degree, despite financial constraints. We owe our gratitude to its Vice Chancellor and the management for this achievement.

If I may speak on a serious and crucial matter, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that education in this country is compartmentalised into different streams, science, arts, commerce etc. from the GCE A Level onwards, whereas, the talents and interests of students cannot be similarly compartmentalised. They have varied talents and wide interests. It is from these talents that new knowledge, scientific discovery, technological innovations, creative art, and literary work are born. Moreover, as the inborn talents cannot be separated into watertight compartments, the education system has to be sufficiently flexible to provide for individual variation of inherent talents and abilities. It is perfectly all right to admit to a university a student who has done quite well in a combination of science and humanities at GCE A/L. The university, too, must be flexible enough to allow such students to study both subjects and award a double degree if necessary.

It would amount to an investment of great value. An engineer, for instance, who has a knowledge of history of his country, would be better equipped to solve the problems his country faces. Same could be said of scientists, agriculturists and doctors.

It has been found that the introduction of a few modules on humanities into the medical curriculum improves the attitudes of medical professionals. Faculty of Medicine Colombo has a department of Medical Humanities the aim being to foster qualities of compassionate care, and for this purpose they include in their curriculum, anthropology, sociology, philosophy and arts. Subjects such as art, music and literature could make a person kind-hearted, understanding and appreciative and tolerant of different points of view.

In recent times, however, the education in humanities seems to have declined in importance as science subjects gain in popularity. This is due to the mistaken notion that in today’s world of electronics, humanities have no place. On the contrary recent research has shown that the humanities are crucial because they help us understand ourselves, our cultures, and our history, fostering critical thinking, communication, and empathy, which are essential for navigating a complex world. Studying the humanities cultivates skills valued by employers and contributes to a more just and fulfilling society.

Ladies and gentlemen, in an era when artificial intelligence can replace human beings the importance of the human touch becomes crucial for the survival of the world. The great Russian writer, Leo Tolstoy defined art as the conscious communication of feeling from one person to another through external signs, aiming to evoke a similar feeling in the recipient. He believed art’s primary function was to unite people by sharing experiences and emotions, fostering empathy and understanding. On a personal note, it was not science that helped me overcome moments of sadness, but my love for humanities.

Every human being has an inherent capacity to appreciate the beauty in art. An education in science must not be allowed to destroy this beautiful emotion. Science and art must complement each other. Schools and universities must be the font for the growth of such a syncretic unified whole. I would not be exaggerating if I say that the survival of the world would depend on the concerted effort by the combination of science and art.

Graduands gathered here today, I am sure, would be blessed with inborn talent and interest in art, music, literature and other beautiful activities. If you like to write continue to write, if you have a talent for music pursue it. Regardless of the vocation you may be engaged in, do not let that inborn taste for beauty be destroyed by mundane affairs. You must cultivate those talents for your happiness and may be for the betterment of the society at large. I wish you, all the success in your future endeavours.

Acceptance speech by Prof. N.A.de S. Amaratunga BDS, FDSRCS, PhD, DSc DLitt on the occasion of being awarded Honorary DLitt

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.