Charter plane crashes in Western Alaska, killing all 8 on board

CNN - A charter plane crashed near a remote radar site in western Alaska, killing all 8 people on board, federal aviation and military officials said.

The flight, a Cessna 441, departed Anchorage and was headed to Cape Newenham, about 450 miles southwest, when it crashed near its destination around 12:15 p.m. Thursday, the Federal Aviation Administration said, according to preliminary information.

Clint Johnson, the National Transportation Safety Board’s Alaska region chief, said two pilots and six passengers were on board the charter flight operated by Security Aviation, according to the Associated Press.

The Alaskan Command said the aircraft was a civilian-contracted flight carrying eight personnel. Search-and-rescue crews later confirmed there were no survivors, the command said.

The plane went down at Cape Newenham Airport, an Air Force airstrip that provides access to the Long Range Radar Site, the command said in its statement.

The FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) will investigate. The NTSB will lead the investigation, the FAA said.

Only military and approved charter flights are allowed to land at the Cape Newenham facility.

The gravel runway is nearly 4,000 feet long and is located on the slope of a more-than-2,300-foot-high mountain, according to FAA maps. There is high terrain reported on both sides and at the south end of the runway, which can make aborting a landing “improbable” after a certain point.

“This is a devastating loss for our military family and the communities we serve,” said US Air Force Lt. Gen. Robert Davis. “These individuals were dedicated professionals carrying out a vital mission in a demanding environment.”

The names of the passengers and crew will be released after next of kin have been notified, the command said.

“Our absolute priority right now is providing unwavering support to their families, friends, and teammates during this devastating time. We are profoundly grateful for the swift and tireless response of our search and recovery professionals,” Davis said.

Alaska Sen. Lisa Murkowski expressed her condolences in a statement on X.

“I’ve traveled extensively with Security Aviation throughout Alaska, and have met many of their experienced pilots,” Murkowski wrote. “I appreciate the U.S. Coast Guard, NTSB, Alaska State Troopers, and the Rescue Coordination Center for responding to the site. Alaska is praying for those on board, their loved ones, and the team at Security Aviation.”

CNN has reached out to the NTSB, Security Aviation, the US Coast Guard, Alaska State Troopers, and the Alaska Rescue Coordination Center.

On its website, Security Aviation said its “fleet of Cessna Conquests are ideally suited for flights in Alaska with challenging weather and airport environments.”

The twin-engine, turbo-prop aircraft are pressurized, seat up to nine passengers and have the ability to cruise at 330 mph at 28,000 feet, Security Aviation says.