Cabinet Subcommittee on El Niño orders disaster drills, public awareness drive

Preparedness drills to be piloted first in landslide-prone Kandy, Badulla, Matale and Nuwara Eliya

Public awareness campaign to run via electronic and print media as dry conditions turn to rain over next two months

Divisional Secretariat-level operational centres to be set up ahead of anticipated floods and landslides

Progress of ongoing relief measures for those already affected by El Niño conditions reviewed

The Special Cabinet Subcommittee and Officials’ Committee appointed to address the impact of the El Niño climate phenomenon met for the fifth time at the Presidential Secretariat on 14 September, 2026, chaired by Minister of Environment Dr. Dhammika Patabendi.

With El Niño-driven weather expected to shift from the current dry spell to wetter conditions over the next two months, the committees discussed measures to prepare for the change.

The committees decided to raise public awareness of potential floods and landslides linked to increased rainfall, and to conduct disaster preparedness drills to familiarise communities with the appropriate response in an emergency.

Initial drills were ordered for the districts of Kandy, Badulla, Matale and Nuwara Eliya, identified as most vulnerable to landslides, with instructions that the necessary measures be taken without delay.

The meeting also agreed to run a public awareness program through electronic and print media, and discussed preparing communities in advance by establishing operational centres at Divisional Secretariat level.

The committees additionally reviewed progress on relief measures already under way for those affected by the prevailing El Niño conditions, as well as plans for measures ahead.

Housing, Construction and Water Supply Minister Dr. Susil Ranasinghe; Plantation and Community Infrastructure Minister Samantha Vidyaratne; Secretary/Convener of the Special Cabinet Subcommittee, Chairman of the Officials’ Committee and Chief of Staff to the President Prabath Chandrakeerthi; Agriculture, Livestock, Land and Irrigation Ministry Secretary D.P. Wickramasinghe; Department of Meteorology Director General A.L.K. Wijemanne; Disaster Management Centre Director General Major General Sampath Kotuwegoda (Retd.); National Building Research Organisation Director General Dr. Gamini Jayatissa; and National Water Supply and Drainage Board General Manager Engineer T. Bharatheedasan, along with officials from the relevant institutions, were also present.