Working out my future with my father

It was a hot, sunny afternoon. A few dark clouds appeared and disappeared on the horizon. Humidity was beyond bearable as the pre-monsoon heat peaked. I sat in the shade of a passion fruit vine that wove a complicated pattern on the trellis connecting the back door of our house to the outdoor kitchen.

A reluctant, intermittent breeze occasionally brought some conmfort. I suffered in my sarong, hoping for evening lightning, thunder, and a heavy shower to cool the surroundings, lazily watching the shadow of the trellis on the ground, as it changed with the setting sun.

I could see my mother through the narrow kitchen door. She sat on the kitchen floor cutting vegetables. She was in a sweat, and every two minutes she stopped her work to wipe her face and acknowledge my presence with a smile. Strong sunlight barely let me see inside the kitchen. I wondered how she felt, sweating in front of the naked flames in the hearth of the windowless small kitchen.

Gradually, the sun penetrated the shade of the passion fruit vine and exposed me to burning heat. I could not move my chair, as it had only three legs; the fourth was missing. Five bricks stacked vertically supported it. It was a rickety contraption with a rough, thick plank on top, because its old rattan weave and the dirty cushion had already disintegrated. Next to it was my father’s throne, with two armrests and a broken rattan seat. A flat, hard cushion stuffed with coconut fiber sat on it; its cover torn to expose the matted fiber underneath.

My father designed the house we lived in and two carpenters built it in 1961. He said he had built it to satisfy some of his senior relatives, who reminded him that his four sons had no home to call their own. They also reminded him that the children did not own even a single coconut tree to pluck from. He blamed Eusabius Uncle for not supporting him financially to buy a piece of land and build a house.

He had asked Eusabius Uncle several times for a loan of Rs 3,000 to buy a piece of land and build a house, but Eusabius Uncle refused because my father had failed to return money borrowed many years earlier. My father thought that Eusabius Uncle, as a rich businessman, should help his niece, my mother, and her children to buy a piece of land and build a house.

He borrowed three thousand rupees from a local bank, bought 38 perches of land at an auction at Maradanawatte in Hendala, and built the house in three weeks. Two problems in occupying it were the water supply and the toilet. Father bought three large concrete rings and sank them one on on top of the other in sandy ground. The well was six feet deep and provided brackish water, which we had to boil for several hours before it was potable. It served as our drinking water source and as a place to bathe and wash our clothes.

Construction of the toilet was a challenge. Father thought we could use an open pit without a roof to meet the immediate need. He said he would borrow more money to build a water sealed toilet. It took 12 months to borrow the money from his bank to construct a toilet. The walls of the house and the toilet were half-an-inch thick wooden planks. A mason cemented the floor. Rubberized sheets, usually used as roof material for cattle sheds and outdoor buildings, covered the roof.

The doors and windows were bought from a timber yard. They were of odd shapes, but the two carpenters fixed them as my father instructed. During the monsoon rains, heavy winds sometimes blew several sheets off the roof. My younger brother, Gamini, always volunteered to climb up in the rain, pull the displaced rubberized sheets back in place and nail them together.

The house comprised a small verandah, a tiny study, two bedrooms, a small sitting room, a dining area, and a kitchen. The dining area had one large table. My father’s shaving paraphernalia permanently occupied one corner of it closer to a window. A small teapoy was used as a chair. Usually, I used the large table in the evenings and early mornings to do homework.

One bedroom was my parents’, with two beds. They kept their trunk full of clothes in their room, and father’s weekly clothes on hooks above it. My paternal grandmother lived with us and had her bed in the second bedroom. Nihal, my elder brother, occupied the other bed in that room. I slept on a mat in the sitting room with Gamini. The youngest brother, Parakrama, slept with my parents.

My mother’s kitchen was her domain. It was small, and she organized it well. She kept rice in a large wooden box with a tightly fitted lid. I spent my evenings sitting on the box, watching her cook. She offered me a piece to munch on when she cut a carrot or a cucumber. I eagerly waited for a piece of umbalakada from her. She occasionally taught me how to cook vegetables, meat, and fish, and, more importantly, how to start a fire. I enjoyed the aroma coming from the clay pots when she cooked food. I thought my mother was the most talented cook in the world.

It was a Saturday afternoon. Father slept a few hours after lunch on weekends, especially on Sundays. I worried about how he slept in the scorching heat. The rubber mattress on his bed was loosely spread over a wooden frame in a tiny room, just big enough for two narrow beds. On one bed, he sweated profusely but slept well, perhaps because the warped wall planks left enough space for a breeze to enter.

I had the habit of watching my father’s chest to check whether he was breathing. I had a nagging feeling that he might die soon. I think this fear became stronger after I listened to a radio program on heart health. My father displayed most of the warning signs of a heart attack: obesity, heavy drinking, eating red meat, especially pork, and worrying about his and our future.

He could not sleep at night because of his worries. He often woke up his mother for a chat through the wooden wall that separated them. I thought afternoon siestas would compensate for his sleep deficit. I pushed away the idea that he could die of a heart attack. I consoled myself by thinking he was still young, in his forties. I never discussed my fears about his health with anybody.

Once, after a two-hour siesta, my father occupied his throne and demanded a cup of tea from my mother. Mother asked me whether I also wanted a cup. Strong black tea with lots of sugar was our afternoon tea. While sipping his tea, father turned toward me and tried to catch my eye. He, too, was in a sarong and had a small piece of thin cloth around his shoulders. He wiped his face with the fabric and blamed the weather for making him uncomfortable.

My armless chair kept me a few inches above him, which he disliked. He again told me that I should find another chair to sit comfortably. He wanted to talk to me without turning his head and looking up. ‘Now you are a man!’ my father uttered without warning. My birthday was three days before, and I had turned 13. It passed without a party, kisses, a cake, or gifts. In our home, nobody talked about birthdays, cakes, or parties.

I vaguely remembered that my father bought me a toy helicopter for Christmas when I was four years old. In December, he took us to Colombo on Christmas Eve to buy a shirt or two for each of us from pavement hawkers. He decided on the color and design of each shirt. After buying them, he took us for an ice cream treat. Aleric’s and Elephant House were his favorites. Sometimes, we walked with him a mile or more to reach an ice cream shop on a busy road.

On our way, we watched colorful toys and beautiful clothes on the pavements and in shop displays. Neither he nor we stopped to touch them or check their prices. We did not want to spoil our chance of getting an ice cream cup by angering our father. He believed that his children should suffer as he did. His philosophy was that poverty triggers inner strength which, in turn, propels a kid to greatness.

My father’s declaration on my manhood stunned me. He repeated it, looked closely at my face, and asked, ‘Now you are a man, and you should know what you will do with your life. What are your plans for life?’ I smiled, and he smiled too, but hesitantly. ‘You think about it and tell me later.’

We drank tea peacefully and then discussed my homework. He then listened to my mother’s gossip. She did not raise her head from cooking but eagerly shared any new information she had picked up with my father. She complained that the next door neighbors were too noisy and wished they had fewer children. She said another neighbor was scouting the road in front of our house to see whether we had bought a new radio. She refused to go to church on Sundays because a cad raised his sarong to wipe his face whenever she passed his house. My father ignored her complaints.

Three days later, after school, my father and I sat on our chairs behind the house. It was a beautiful evening; the sun was setting, and a fresh breeze brought us some comfort. My mother made aggala, sweet fried rice balls with leftover rice and jaggery.

“Have you thought about your future?” he asked. I shyly replied, “I want to become a doctor.” “Why do you want to become a doctor? I think you should do a PhD and then become an academic doctor”. I agreed.

“I want to look after my mother and also you of course.” He chuckled. “I do not think you need to worry about us. We are still young, and I will get a pension when we are old. That will be enough for your mother and me.”

“What else? “I think I will marry one day a pretty girl who is kind to you and my mother.” He called out, “Catherine, your son has plans to marry a pretty girl. Have you already arranged one for him?” My mother laughed, and I felt bullied.

“Do you have a girl in your mind? I saw you smiling with that Burgher girl the other day. I will break your legs if you get entangled with her”. He threatened and then smiled.

“I do not have a particular girl in my mind. But I would like to marry a girl who looks like Princess Anne,” I confessed. “Why?” he asked. I tried to explain, “She is on the cover page of my exercise books. I don’t know; probably I like her hair and smile.”

“Keep quiet. You are going too far with bad thoughts. When you are 30 we will find a suitable girl for you. Do not worry now. I think your mother is spoiling you. Think about a PhD in political science or law, becoming a scholar, and living a happy life”, he advised.

I told him that I wanted to live a happy life and understand how a PhD would help me to gain happiness. He laughed, patted my head, and told me, “You are too young to discuss life and the future. I should have waited for a while before broaching the topic. For now, concentrate on your studies.”

My father said that he heard about Nihal’s promise to Brother Cassian to become a priest. He wanted to know my view on becoming a priest. I told him I would consider the possibility if there is a guarantee that I could become a bishop. He liked that answer and told my mother,

“Catherine, we do not have to worry about Jayantha. He is already thinking big.”

My mother laughed and said, “Yes, he is thinking of going abroad for higher studies and finding a suitable girl as his partner. You do not have to worry about him getting entangled with a girl in this area.”

A Tribute to Sir Christopher Ondaatje – A Diagonal Journey across Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.