Ceyline Group unveils ‘Roots for the Future’ national reforestation initiative to mark 40th anniversary

Ceyline Group is celebrating its landmark 40th anniversary by launching ‘Roots for the Future’, a national reforestation initiative with a vision to plant and nurture 40,000 native trees across Sri Lanka.

The core objective of the ‘Roots for the Future’ initiative is to mobilize Sri Lanka’s youth as active agents of natural capital restoration, establishing a self-sustaining culture of lifelong environmental accountability across school communities nationwide.

The project was launched with Vidyarathna College and Ashoka College Horana on board.  Accordingly, Ceyline Group is replacing unmonitored “plant-and-forget” corporate events with a digital verification ecosystem anchored by the proprietary OXY App platform to combine youth empowerment with audited ecological restoration. The project creates a transparent tri-party framework uniting Ceyline Group, the Ministry of Education, and the Department of Forest Conservation, to secure a living green outline for Sri Lanka’s future generations.

As the Primary Sponsor & Digital Ecosystem Owner, the Ceyline Group provides full baseline funding for the Phase 1 launch of 4,000 plants, soil nutrients, and operational deployment toward the 40,000-tree vision. The Group will deploy and host the OXY App digital governance architecture and also act as the corporate catalyst uniting national government bodies behind a shared ESG vision. The Department of Forest Conservation, in its role as “Technical Oversight & Scientific Validation”, validates endemic and native plant species selections tailored to specific regional agro ecological zones. It also deploys local Forest Extension Officers to provide technical oversight, regional plant species validation, and scientific guidance.

The project roadmap spans 4 distinct operational phases, transitioning the Group’s 40th anniversary from initial agreement into a permanent national movement. Phase 01 included the setting up of the tri-party framework between all 3 parties and finalising of species selection maps. Phase 02 involved the custom engineering of the OXY app platform, baseline procurement of endemic saplings (4,000 units), and pilot onboarding of school leaders.

Phase 3 is actively underway where the digital platform is fully operational, actively tracking initial baseline planting across participating school networks with real-time audit capability, laying the groundwork to scale toward the 40,000 -tree vision. The 4th and final phase involves opening the platform architecture to external corporate co-sponsors to fund student incentive expansion and scale targets toward and beyond the 40,000-tree vision.

Natasha Egodage - Executive Deputy Chairperson and Chief Purpose Officer of the Ceyline Group stated, “Celebrating Ceyline’s 40th anniversary with the ‘Roots for the Future’ initiative allows us to live our purpose: ‘inspiring leadership in everyone we touch, to build a sustainable and equitable future for all.’ We hope this project of environmental stewardship empowers and inspires the next generation of leaders.”