President Xi Jinping makes four propositions for peace in Mideast

Chinese President Xi Jinping (right) with UAE Abu Dhabi Crown Prince Sheikh Khaled bin Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan during their meeting in Beijing last week

Chinese President Xi Jinping has made four propositions on safeguarding and promoting peace and stability in the Middle East.

He presented the proposals last week when he met with United Arab Emirates (UAE) Abu Dhabi Crown Prince Sheikh Khaled bin Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing.

The two sides exchanged views on the current situation in the Middle East and the Gulf region. President Xi stressed China’s principled position of promoting peace and facilitating talks, and reiterated China’s readiness to continue playing a constructive role in this regard.

1. Stay committed to the principle of peaceful co-existence: The Gulf States in the Middle East are close neighbours that cannot move away. It’s important to support the Gulf States in improving their ties, work to build a common, comprehensive, cooperative, and sustainable security architecture of the Middle East and the Gulf region, and consolidate the foundation for peaceful co-existence.

2. Stay committed to the principle of national sovereignty: Sovereignty serves as a foundation for all countries, especially developing countries, to survive and thrive, and it must not be violated. The sovereignty, security, and territorial integrity of the Gulf States should be earnestly respected, and the safety of their personnel, facilities, and institutions vigorously safeguarded.

3. Stay committed to the principle of international rule of law: We should safeguard the authority of international rule of law, reject selective application, and prevent the world from returning to the law of the jungle. It is important to firmly uphold the international system with the UN at its core, the international order based on international law, and the basic norms governing international relations underpinned by purposes and principles of the UN Charter.

4. Stay committed to a balanced approach to development and security: Security is a prerequisite for development, and development serves as a safeguard of security. All sides should work to create a sound environment for and bring positive energy to the development of the Gulf States. China stands ready to share with the Gulf countries the opportunities through Chinese modernisation, and work with them to nurture a fertile ground for regional development and security.