Finding solutions to life’s problems

You might think that finding solutions to life’s problems is like trying to drink from a fire-hose. This is because there is so much information coming to you from various sources. One way to find solutions to life’s problems is to consult someone knowledgeable like a scientist or a philosopher. However, they may not have the time or inclination to answer your simple questions such as: How to get over a hiccup? How to say no to someone without hurting his feelings? On the other hand, some of us do not know how to write a thank you note or propose a vote of thanks.

When you are extremely busy with your work, a co-worker asks whether you could help him to check his project report. Say no to such a request but thank him for thinking of you as a wise or competent person. This kind of approach will help in most situations because the person who is asking for a favour finds no way to respond. Another way to avoid such a person is to say, “I’d love to, but I can’t do it right now. Is there some other way I can help you?” The person who approached you will not be hurt because you are ready to help him.

A business executive has found another way to say no to certain requests. When someone wants something done, say “I am a little busy right now, but Mr Silva will certainly help you.” The person who asked for your help will be pleased with your generosity. The same executive would say, “I’m not familiar with the subject, otherwise I could have helped you.” The person who approached you will not be offended with such a reply.

Have you ever written a thank you note? Whenever you receive a gift send a thank you card or thank you note appreciating the sender’s generosity. The person who sent the gift will be highly pleased. Your thank you note need not be long, but it must mention the gift you received. Say that you were delighted to have received such a gift. Learn to appreciate the sender’s thoughtfulness. What is more, send your thank you note immediately after receiving the gift.

When a death occurs in a friend’s family, write a condolence note and send it immediately. If possible, send a hand-written condolence note. Express your sorrow at the dead person. If you know something good about the dead person, mention it. Do not use phrases like: “It was God’s will” or “Everybody dies and you shouldn’t worry about it.”

Today very few people write love letters. Before the arrival of smartphones, young lovers used to write lengthy love letters to their beloved. Writing love letters is an art. Write it with a pen and never type it or send it as an email. A hand-written love letter is a precious gift. Some people collect them to be read after marriage! There are many books on how to write love letters. Love letters can never be replaced by phone calls or short messages.

Some people appear to be more intelligent than others. You will note it when you attend a wedding or funeral. One way to appear intelligent is to know your news – both local and international. In order to gather news, you have to read newspapers regularly, watch television news and listen to radio news. Newspaper reading has dropped considerably in modern society. People get the latest news on their mobile phones and laptops.

If you wish to appear intelligent, brush up on your grammar. If your grammar is weak, you will make many howlers such as “I drink few milk” for “I drink less milk”. Do not say, “I and my sister went to the library.” Put yourself last and say “My sister and I went to the library.” The word ‘often’ is pronounced without ‘t.’ Some lesser educated people pronounce the ‘t’ in ‘often’ as if they are living in the United States.

Intelligent people are highly organised. They keep their books and files in an orderly manner. Someone who is disorganised is perceived as a scatterbrain. Declutter your room at regular intervals and do your homework before learning or teaching. Try to remember the names of well-known people and your friends. Forgetfulness is not a mark of intelligence but stupidity. If you write a letter, essay or a book, go through it carefully several times to eliminate mistakes. Nobody will respect you if you make any spelling mistakes.

American astronomer, writer and scientist Carl Sagan’s words still ring in my ears. He said, “Knowing a great deal is not the same as being smart; intelligence is not information alone but also judgment, the manner in which information is collected and used.”

If your vagus nerve is irritated, you will get a hiccups. Sometimes you will find it difficult to stop your hiccup. One day a student got a hiccup and he could not get over it. His class teacher came to his rescue. He said, “Hold your hands over your ears.” The boy did so and the hiccup disappeared. The scientific explanation of hiccup is that when branches of the vagus nerve reach into the auditory system calming the nerve endings can throw off the hiccup pattern. Another way to get over a hiccup is to breathe into a paper bag. When you do so, it will increase the amount of carbon dioxide in your system and stop the spasm. Another method to ward off a hiccup is to guzzle a glass of warm water without stopping. You can also gargle your mouth with ice water or eat a teaspoon of sugar or a tablespoon of peanut butter or a spoonful of honey if you get a hiccup.

Today, most of us are very busy with our work. Sometimes we feel that we need more time to finish our work. According to time-management experts, you can do something about it. Before doing any important task, draw up a plan. Prepare a to-do list and keep yourself moving forward. Try to follow deadlines and avoid distractions. Stay focused and finish the task at hand. Whenever possible, delegate certain tasks to subordinates. You have to be flexible in your work. Finish one task and move onto the next. Do not be a slave to your to-do list and take a rest at regular intervals.

It is humanly impossible to list all the life-problems and offer solutions. When a new problem crops up, use your intelligence, life-experience and the help of experts to arrive at a solution. A life without problems will be dull. Therefore be ready to tackle any problem that may come up at any stage in your life.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.