Shirkers as preachers

There seems to be no end to the JVP-NPP government’s  volte-face. The ruling party leaders vehemently opposed Emergency regulations while out of power, launching into tirades against the previous governments for abusing Emergency to further their political interests by suppressing the democratic rights of the Opposition and the public. But they are now practising the very opposite of what they preached; they keep on extending the state of Emergency, which was imposed in the aftermath of the landfall of Cyclone Ditwah, six months ago. It also has no qualms about using the Prevention of Terrorism Act, which it promised to do away with.

The government made a mockery of its much-touted commitment to upholding democracy once again on Thursday (07) by extending the state of Emergency. The Opposition never misses an opportunity to condemn the government for doing so, but most of its members are absent when motions seeking parliamentary approval for extending Emergency are put to the vote.

On Thursday, the motion presented by the government to extend Emergency regulations received 145 votes, with only six Opposition MPs being present in the House to vote against it. Seventy-three MPs, including 13 government members, were absent during the crucial vote. That the ayes would have it was a foregone conclusion, but the Opposition MPs should have remained in the House when a division was called on the motion. Last month 60 MPs, representing both sides of the House, were absent when a vote was taken on Emergency. The MPs’ absence during crucial debates and votes amounts to a dereliction of legislative duty and an abdication of parliamentary responsibility.

The Chief Opposition Whip and party whips are responsible for ensuring that the Opposition MPs are present during debates and votes. They only talk nineteen to the dozen in the House. A wag says it is a case of all sizzle and no steak. Shouldn’t these Opposition bigwigs, given to pontification, put their house in order before lecturing the government on how to conduct its affairs?

Our legislators parade their knowledge of Erskine May’s authoritative work, Parliamentary Practice. They however do not follow the principles enunciated by May in his seminal treatise. May has viewed parliamentary attendance not merely as a procedural obligation but also as an essential condition for representative democracy and effective scrutiny. Reflected in his writings is the traditional Westminster belief that Parliament functions properly only when its members are physically present and actively participate in debates, scrutinise government actions, serve on committees and vote.

May’s emphasis is also on the ethical dimension of the MPs’ attendance during debates. The members are expected to be present during the proceedings, listening to dissenting views and responding to questions. He has frowned on the practice of members departing immediately after delivering their speeches in the House. This is something the Sri Lankan Presidents ought to pay attention to. They have the bad habit of haranguing the MPs and hurrying out of the chamber immediately afterwards. They apparently consider it infra dig to remain in the chamber and listen to the Opposition MPs. In Westminster democracies, influenced by May, parliamentary attendance has come to symbolise political responsibility, discipline and commitment to public service. Sadly, the members of the Sri Lankan Parliament do not seem to care much about this cherished tradition.

A parliamentary sitting reportedly costs about Rs. 32.2 million, and it does not make sense to spend so much money if the MPs skip sittings. Those who do not participate in debates and votes in the House make a strong case, albeit unwittingly, for a smaller Parliament.

If Parliament can manage with about 150-170 members, as it does at present, why should the taxpayers be made to pay through the nose to maintain as many as 225 MPs besides 445 provincial council members (including 45 ministers) and more than 8,500 local councillors. No wonder there is a resurgence of anti-politics.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.