Thousands evacuated in Southern California due to failing chemical tank

(Reuters) - Officials ordered tens of thousands of people to evacuate their homes in the Los Angeles ‚Äåsuburb of Garden Grove on Friday due to a failing chemical tank that was likely to either leak or explode, possibly releasing toxic vapor into the air, first responders said.

Firefighters doused the tanks with water using a mechanical device that kept humans ‚Äãat a safe distance, stabilizing the temperature and "buying us time," said Craig Covey, division chief of ‚Äãthe Orange County Fire Authority, in a video posted on social media.

In a previous video, ‚ÅÝCovey had said there were two options remaining, either that the tank would fail and spill up ‚Äãto 7,000 gallons (26,500 liters) of toxic chemicals, or that it would explode and endanger neighboring tanks.

"I know I keep ‚Äãtalking about we were handed this situation where there's only two things that can happen, it could crack and leak, or it could blow up. That's not acceptable to us,"

Covey said in the later video. "I have an entire team actively working locally, ‚Äãregionally, across the state, and across the country, to try to figure out how to fix this."

Covey said ‚Äãhis goal was to "get all these brilliant minds together to put a plan together, so that we don't let this ‚Äåblow up."

The ‚ÅÝmalfunctioning tank contained methyl methacrylate, a flammable, volatile chemical used in plastics and manufacturing at an aerospace plant, the Orange County Register reported.

The situation, which began on Thursday, unfolded in Garden Grove, a city of about 172,000 people some 30 miles (50 km) south of Los Angeles.

Officials discovered the increased risk of an explosion on Friday ‚Äãafter getting an update from ‚Äãthe manufacturing company, said ‚ÅÝTJ McGovern, interim chief of the Orange County Fire Authority.

Officials established three evacuation shelters, one in Garden Grove and one each in the neighboring cities of Anaheim ‚Äãand Cypress.

The evacuation zone was home to about 40,000 people, Garden Grove Police Chief ‚ÄãAmir El-Farra ‚ÅÝsaid, as reported by the Orange County Register, and about 15% of them were refusing to leave, he said.

Health officials were concerned that vapor could escape with the potential of causing severe respiratory issues in the event of prolonged ‚ÅÝexposure. ‚ÄãBut so far air quality monitors had not detected any vapor, ‚Äãsaid Dr. Regina Chinsio-Kwong of the Orange County Health Care Agency.

"You are safe as long as you are out of the zone that ‚Äãwas determined to be an evacuation zone," Chinsio-Kwong said.