INSEE Cement launches Galle training school

Delivers Mason’s Upskilling NVQ Level 3 Programme to advance recognition and opportunities for masons

​INSEE Cement, Sri Lanka’s leading and only fully integrated cement manufacturer, with flagship brands INSEE Sanstha and Mahaweli Marine Plus, opened a dedicated training school at its Galle plant recently, to deliver the Mason’s Upskilling NVQ Level 3 Programme, a pioneering project designed to formally recognise and elevate the skills of the country’s experienced masons.

The Mason Training School was ceremonially opened by INSEE Cement Chairman Nandana Ekanayake, INSEE Cement CEO Eng. Thusith Gunawarnasuriya and Chamber of Construction Industry of Sri Lanka (CCI) Secretary General and CEO Eng. Col. Nissanka N. Wijeratne, together with the senior members of the INSEE Cement and CCI teams.

The programme was developed under a memorandum of understanding between INSEE Cement, the CCI and Tertiary and Vocational Education Commission (TVEC).

Unlike the conventional training courses, it adopts the Recognition of Prior Learning methodology, which assesses and validates the practical knowledge the masons have gained over many years, enabling them to obtain a nationally recognised vocational qualification.

Through the process, 100 selected masons from the Galle and Puttalam region will be awarded the NVQ Level 3 certification as the first phrase of the programme. The facilities within the INSEE Cement Galle plant have been specially prepared to host the training and assessment, ensuring a safe and effective learning environment.

Each partner has a distinct role in delivering the programme. INSEE Cement will identify and select the masons and provide facilities, equipment, safety measures and technical expertise. The CCI is delivering vocational training, managing assessments and coordinating with the TVEC. The TVEC will set the required national standards, supervise training and issue the NVQ Level 3 certificates.

INSEE Cement believes the initiative is more than training but about dignity, recognition and opportunity for Sri Lanka’s masons. In awarding the NVQ certification to the skilled workers, the company is strengthening the construction quality, elevating safety standards and opening new career pathways for the industry.

Eng. Gunawarnasuriya said, “We are proud to partner the CCI and TVEC on this important initiative. Sincere thanks to both organisations for their close collaboration in bringing the programme to life. Upskilling and formally recognising the masons who have long been the backbone of the construction industry is something we are deeply proud to support. INSEE Cement looks forward to extending the opportunity to more masons as the programme expands to Puttalam.”

Following the successful completion of the Galle phase, the initiative will expand to Puttalam, with the necessary arrangements to be planned over the next two months and the second phase expected to commence thereafter.

Extending the opportunity to the masons in multiple regions, INSEE Cement and its partners aim to uplift the workforce, improve construction practices and contribute to Sri Lanka’s socioeconomic progress through skill development and recognition.