CIPM SL conducts 9th Certified HRD Auditor Programme

The participants with AVM Manoaj Keppetipola- Chairman of PMS Committee, Prof. TV Rao - Lead Trainer, Nandini Chawla – CEO, TVRLS, and Tiron Surendra –Manager, PMS

The internationally acclaimed Certified HRD Auditor Programme 2026 was conducted for the 9th time at the CIPM Members’ Lounge with the participation of 21 HR professionals representing leading organizations across Sri Lanka.

Organized by the People Management Solutions Division (PMS), the corporate HR solutions arm of Chartered Institute of Personnel Management Sri Lanka in collaboration with T V Rao Learning Systems, this exclusive 5-day certification programme has been designed to strengthen internal HR audit capability and develop strategic HR leadership competencies aligned with modern organizational requirements.

The programme commenced on 15th May 2026, welcoming a dynamic group of HR professionals and organizational leaders embarking on a transformative learning journey focused on strengthening HRD auditing capabilities and strategic HR impact. “As organizations increasingly prioritize governance, culture transformation, leadership capability, and sustainable performance, the need for a strong internal HR audit capability has become more critical than ever. The Certified HRD Auditor Programme, therefore, serves as a timely and impactful initiative in developing future-ready HR professionals equipped to drive strategic organizational transformation,” said Prof. T. V. Rao -Chief Lead Facilitator.

Conducted under the guidance of Prof. T. V. Rao, Chief Lead Facilitator, together with Nandini Chawla, Chief Executive Officer & Co-Founder of TVRLS, they shared valuable global insights, practical audit methodologies, and real-world HRD experiences throughout the sessions.Structured as a comprehensive 05-day certification programme, the first three physical sessions were successfully conducted on 15th, 16th, and 17th May 2026 at the CIPM Members Lounge, followed by two online learning and assessment sessions.

The programme provided participants with extensive exposure to internationally recognized HRD audit frameworks and strategic HR practices, includingHRD Systems and Subsystems, Performance Management Audits, HR Competencies and Leadership Capability, Organizational Climate and HRD Culture, HR Impact and Strategic Alignment, HRD Scorecard Frameworks, Diagnostic Audit Methodologies, and Strategic HR Evaluation and Governance.

Participants also engaged in practical learning through case studies, group discussions, presentations, audit tools, and real-world HRD audit applications that enhanced their professional capability in evaluating organizational HR effectiveness.

A key highlight of the programme was the active engagement, collaboration, and enthusiasm demonstrated by all participants throughout the sessions, creating a highly interactive and practical learning environment focused on organizational excellence, people effectiveness, and strategic business impact.

Upon successful completion of the programme, participants will be awarded joint certification by the Chartered Institute of Personnel Management Sri Lanka and T V Rao Learning Systems, recognizing their successful completion of this internationally benchmarked professional certification programme.