The Chinese Train to Vietnam!

When Sri Lankans were rushing to train stations to go home to celebrate Sinhala and Hindu New Year on April 14, 2026, Vietnam’s Paramount Leader and President To Lam arrived in China for a four-day state visit. He is referred to as such as he heads the Vietnamese Communist Party and the government. It was his first foreign trip since taking office in early April. A key feature of the trip was to experience China’s high speed rail (HSR) network.

He began the visit with a HSR trip from Beijing to Xiong’an and concluded the visit with a 2,400 KM rail journey from Beijing to Nanjing. Those who remembered, compared President Lam’s Beijing Nanjing rail trip to Deng Xiaoping’s historic HSR trip in Japan in 1978 shortly before opening the Chinese economy. It was after experiencing the trip that Deng had advised Chinese engineers to develop a similar train in China. As Vietnam is planning its HSR, with assistance from China, to lift its economy to the next level, Lam’s train trip is expected to be a historic juncture.

The 855 KM Yunnan–Haiphong railway (Indo-China–Yunnan Railroad) was the first rail road between Vietnam and China. It was built by the French colonial rulers (1904 to 1910) to deliver European products to the region and take away natural resources – minerals, opium etc. – to Europe. Before the rail road, travel time from Haiphong port to Kunming was approx. 28 days (16 days by boat along the Red River and 12 days overland) (Ref. Indo China statistics). The Kunming – Hanoi rail road now connects the two countries and the proposed HRS is expected to turn a new page in rail connectivity. Approx. 26 year ago twice a week cross border passenger services operated between Kunming and Hanoi. However, due to landslides there were frequent delays and in 2005 the passenger service on the Chinese section was terminated and most passenger coaches were donated to Myanmar (Ref. Media).

If French railroads in the far-east were good, China developing railroads to increase regional connectivity under the BRI is equally good. Some talk about repairing the Kandy railroad. Is it worth spending wealth to renovate a railroad on landslide prone terrain? Instead, alternative methods such as cable cars and low altitude transportation should replace such rail tracks. It may help promote tourism. At the same time completing the central expressway disregarding ‘Pandukaranda Tree’ politics is a practical long term solution. Sri Lankans should utilize the technical know how which comes with the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) to increase connectivity.

Those who heard President Lam have worked with China and India to develop the brand new Hambantota and old Jaffna railroads respectively. Some who saw ‘Yaldevi’ resuming its journey to Kankesanthurai on May 11, 2026 (Ref. Media) asked if trains can usher peace when ‘Yaldevi’ resumed trips till Jaffna with Indian support. However, the same people never criticized PM Narendra Modi then for helping to rebuild the northern railroad.

Sri Lankans should learn from Vietnam, work with those near and far to develop infrastructure to increase connectivity. That will connect people, prevent conflicts and take the country to the next level. Once Rambo destroyed Vietnam on the silver screen but the Vietnamese are working with China to ensure employment even for Rambo types as tour guides and forest rangers etc. Sri Lankans should take the same approach.

Few countries in the world have railways capable of operating at 4,000 meters above sea level

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.