Ceylon Chamber of Commerce announces leadership transition

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce announces a planned and orderly leadership transition, underscoring its commitment to strong governance, leadership continuity, and long-term institutional stability.

Accordingly, Shiran Fernando has been appointed Secretary General and Chief Executive Officer, effective 8th May 2026, succeeding . Buwanekabahu Perera, who will conclude a three-year tenure at the helm of the Chamber.

Commenting on the transition, Krishan Balendra, the Chairperson of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce stated:

“This leadership transition reflects the Chamber’s long-standing belief that strong institutions are built through continuity, sound governance, and deliberate succession planning. Over the past three years, the Chamber has been further strengthened institutionally, allowing us to move forward with confidence. The Board is fully assured that this transition will ensure stability while positioning the Chamber to meet the evolving needs of our members and the broader economy.”

Supporting this transition, institutional stability is further reinforced by the continued leadership of Ms. Alikie Perera, who serves as Deputy Secretary General, Chief Operating Officer / Financial Controller and CEO of GS1 Lanka. With over three decades of service spanning multiple leadership cycles and governance eras, including service under 16 successive Chairpersons, she has been instrumental in sustaining the Chamber’s operational integrity and financial discipline. Notably, she has played a key role over two decades in steering the Chamber’s flagship platforms, including the Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit (SLEIS) and the Best Corporate Citizens Awards [BCC Awards], both of which have become nationally and internationally recognised benchmarks. Her continued role provides assurance that institutional memory and organisational continuity remain firmly intact.

Parliament rocked by LKR 13.2 billion NDB fraud: Systemic failure or regulatory lapse?

Dialog Finance Launches Next-Generation Virtual Debit Card, Elevating Digital Payments in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.