Second THRIVE PSC meets in Kilinochchi, ensuring gender equality central to district development

Senior Government representatives, development partners and implementing agencies gathered in Kilinochchi on 19 August for the second Project Steering Committee (PSC) meeting of the Together for Her: Resilience-building, Inclusivity and Voices for Equality (THRIVE) project.

Funded by the Australian Government and jointly implemented by UN Women, Chrysalis and the Foundation for Innovative Social Development (FISD), THRIVE works across six districts to help women build sustainable livelihoods, strengthen resilience to climate and economic shocks, and take on greater leadership roles within their communities.

In its second year of implementation, the project’s highest governance forum was hosted in a project district, Kilinochchi, reflecting local leadership and a commitment to ensuring that decision-making is informed by the realities, priorities, and aspirations of women on the ground.

Co-chaired by the Women and Child Affairs Ministry, the Australian High Commission and UN Women Sri Lanka, the PSC convened national ministries, district administrations and implementing partners to review progress, identify priorities for the year ahead, and strengthen coordination.

“THRIVE demonstrates the impact that can be achieved when government, development partners and communities work together to expand opportunities for women and strengthen resilient livelihoods,” said Women and Child Affairs Ministry Additional Secretary (Development) Nilmini Herath.

“Australia is proud to support THRIVE as part of our commitment to advancing women’s economic empowerment and inclusive development in Sri Lanka,” said Australian High Commission Second Secretary Laura Nicholson. “This visit to Kilinochchi is an opportunity to connect with women who are leading change in their communities and to learn from their experiences. Their insights and leadership are invaluable in shaping approaches that support inclusive and sustainable development.”

UN Women Sri Lanka Head of Office Ramaaya Salgado added: “By strengthening livelihoods, supporting resilience to climate and economic shocks, and expanding opportunities for leadership and participation, the project contributes to broader efforts to advance gender equality and women’s empowerment. The partnerships reflected in this Steering Committee are essential to ensuring that these gains are sustainable and reach women across all six project districts.”

Participants attended a Townhall, bringing together local government representatives, civil society organisations and community members. PSC members also visited women-led enterprises and a Value Addition Centre. They engaged with women entrepreneurs and community members to hear first-hand insights of their experiences. Participants observed how women-led businesses are adapting to climate change and other shocks, while considering how THRIVE will support stronger livelihoods, resilience and economic opportunities across project communities.