Harsha dismisses crossover rumours, says SJB remains his political home

CoPF Chair Dr. Harsha de Silva says he has never held discussions with Govt. on joining administration

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP and Committee on Public Finance (COPF) Chair Dr. Harsha de Silva yesterday firmly rejected renewed speculation that he was preparing to join the Government, insisting he had never engaged in discussions with the administration of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and remained committed to the centre-right political space.

In a strongly worded statement, Dr. de Silva said attempts were being made to create instability within the SJB through “false propaganda” surrounding his political future.

“I will not join this Government. There has never been any such discussion,” he said, adding that certain groups appeared intent on creating divisions within the SJB through speculation over defections.

The remarks come against the backdrop of heightened political discussion following the resignation of an SJB colleague Eran Wickramaratne from the party to accept a position in the interim cricket administration appointed by President Dissanayake. The move had triggered fresh rumours over possible crossovers from the Opposition ranks.

Dr. de Silva said he entered politics not through family connections but out of a desire to see Sri Lanka become a developed nation. He said that conviction continued to shape his political decisions and that he would not pursue narrow political advantage.

He also rejected suggestions that he could be drawn away from the centre-right political bloc, saying his political journey would continue within that camp.

Criticising the Government’s economic direction, Dr. de Silva said the administration lacked a far-sighted economic vision and was relying on inward-looking ideas that would fail to transform the country.

“This Government is unsuccessful. It is clear that it does not possess a visionary economic strategy,” he said, adding that Sri Lanka could not be rebuilt through “closed and distorted thinking disconnected from the world”.

Dr. de Silva said he would intensify his political campaign against the Government while supporting policies he believed were beneficial to the country, arguing for a more mature political culture that recognised good policy irrespective of party lines.

However, he also said he was prepared to accept any major responsibility required in the national interest at the appropriate time, adding that Sri Lanka required “a new era”.