Lovers flee as shortcut through Mount Lavinia cemetery is disturbed by ‘ghosts’

It was Tuesday in the third week of August 1966, and the joy of my success at the First Examination in Engineering at the University was somewhat marred by the passing of my aunt, Elsie Amerasekera. She succumbed after a long spell at the Maharagama Cancer Hospital.

Elsie was my father’s older sister by 12 years and was yet just in her 50s. She produced 11 healthy children, sufficient for a mixed gender cricket team. Mervyn, the fourth in line, and my favourite cousin from my father’s side of the family could not make it to the funeral as he had migrated to England relatively recently.

It was before the time of funeral parlours, so the practice was to keep the coffin at home to allow visitors from far and near to pay their respects to the deceased, at any time of the day or night. This is a humorous episode of a two lovers’ shortcut through the Mt. Lavinia Cemetery with eyes only for each other ended.

It is not natural for a child to die before a parent. My grandmother, widowed at the age of 30, was 82 years’ old when my aunt died. Achchi She was in remarkably good health attributed, it was remarked, to her unwillingness to take the bus for short distance travel! She gave a new meaning to ‘a short distance’ in 1960s when\ hardly anyone indulged in walking for health reasons unlike nowadays.

The distance from our home in Ratmalana to my aunt’s place in Dehiwela, was five kilometres. Happily, granny’s strong ‘walking genes’ were also inherited by my father, and me in turn; a clear ‘gain of inheritance’ you may say, over more material things like property.

My grandmother, a good-looking woman, did not look her age at all. I can still remember my eyes welling up seeing her sobbing at Elsie’s coffin. “My daughter, why did you have to go before me?”, she asked. For the parent, the sight of an adult offspring in distress is to cast the child back to its early years.

I have been unfortunate to witness, many a time before and after my aunt’s passing to the grief of parents who have lost a child. Ajahn Brahm, the Spiritual Director of the Buddhist Society of Western Australia, gave the following analogy at a pansakula ceremony for a 17-year-old who died in an accident: “Death is like a tree caught in a storm. Young and old leaves and branches are shed with no discrimination. Rejoice in your child’s memories, to lessen the pain”.

Yet, for the parents, the pain of the loss of a child persists. My aunt’s cremation took place two days later at the Mount Lavinia cemetery at about 5.30 pm. Dusk set in shortly after the pyre was lit. The family opted not to use the gas-fired crematorium, so the cremation was in a purpose-built wooden pyre. It was the custom for the lighting of the pyre to be initiated by two male relatives of the deceased.

In this instance, the ‘torch bearers’ were my aunt’s son and me, both named Nihal and both 20 years’ old at the time. We were old enough to be also assigned the task of remaining at the pyre until the cremation was complete. This was to abide by the long- held tradition of not abandoning the mortal remains until it is turned to ash.

After the usual exchange of sympathies, much of the congregation moved to Malwatte Road, close by, to partake in the traditional mala butha, the funeral repast. The time-honoured meal consisted of tomato curry, dhal, dry fish curry and rice. Following custom, the meal was cooked at the home of the deceased by relatives and friends, but in makeshift hearths avoiding the regular kitchen. The food preparation itself commenced when the coffin left the house for cremation. (Currently, the more accepted and less cumbersome practice is for commercial caterers to provide the meal after the funeral service, as was the case at my parents’ funerals in 2002 and 2010 in Sri Lanka and also among the Sri Lankan community in Australia where I now live).

There was a team from the undertakers assigned to keep the pyre burning using kerosene. When the pyre is built, insertion holes are provided at the two ends for the two torch bearers to set fire to it. The periodic dousing of kerosene to maintain the fire was the undertaker’s responsibility. Their contracted services were to finish around nine o’clock. Hence the need for the presence of the two Nihals to tend to the fire in the event that the incineration was not complete by that time.

For those who are not familiar with the Mount Lavinia Cemetery, an explanation of its layout and topography is warranted.

• The Cemetery is located halfway between the Mount Lavinia and Dehiwela junctions, on the seaside of Galle Road. Between the cemetery and the Odeon Cinema is a lane heading West towards the beach.

• There is an eight-foot-high wall along the length of the cemetery, along Galle Road, with the main entrance to the cemetery consisting of a very large iron gate with two flaps. The gate is located mid-way along the 150-metre wall.

• In front of the cemetery entrance and on the opposite side of Galle Road was a bus halt serving passengers heading from Colombo towards Mount Lavinia. The gates of the cemetery were generally closed, but there was a small side entrance to go in after hours, mainly for the benefit of locals to take a short cut to houses along the lane separating the cemetery from the Odeon Cinema. There was a barbed wire fence running the length of the lane. The many trees on the ‘short-cut’ provided shade from the sun, and also, shelter during showers.

• From Galle Road, the cemetery was more or less flat land for about 75 metres towards the beach. This front section of the cemetery was reserved for burial plots for Christians, mainly, with occasional Buddhist tombstones also visible. Generations of families are buried within the same burial plot and, as the available land diminished, cremation of Christians too began from the early 2000’s. Towards the end of the flat ground there is an open-sided pavilion with a tiled roof offering a space to administer the last rites, if required. The pavilion caters for all religions, mainly Buddhist, Christian and Hindu. Muslims had their exclusive burial grounds elsewhere in Dehiwela.

• Beyond the pavilion, the flat terrain continues for about 10 metres terminating in a retaining wall about a metre in height. At the centre is a narrow, inclined passageway through which a coffin can be carried. The land then gives way to a steepish incline for about 50 metres, beyond which is flat land terminating at a brick wall. Beyond this wall is the gas-fired crematorium, which can be accessed only via the side lane next to the Odeon. The cemetery was roughly rectangular, the longer side some 175 metres in length with high walls on all four sides.

• The area beyond the Christian section is mainly reserved for Buddhists. My aunt’s pyre was built about 30 metres inside the wall bordering the crematorium. Further down the lane and beyond the crematorium were houses all the way to the railway line. Beyond the railway line were huts on the beach. The layout was such that a person entering the cemetery could not see anyone who happened to be in the Buddhist section. This is a key to the episode described below.

At the intersection of the wall bordering the lane next to Odeon cinema and the crematorium wall was a small gate built specifically to allow those taking a short cut through the cemetery to exit onto the lane. Between the pyre and this gate was a frangipani tree (‘Araliya’ in Sinhala) which was in bloom throughout the year.

My cousin and I rested under the tree, seated on the ground, and whiling away the time chatting, but aware of the requirement to inspect the burning pyre regularly. The pyre was in full flight and engulfed in flames, with the burning body visible through the flames. At regular intervals and after 9 pm when the contract staff had departed, our task was to splash kerosene on the pyre, from a safe distance. We were both dressed in white, and of similar height. There were no additional lights in the cemetery, although the burning pyre did illuminate thesurrounding area, its lighting did not extend to the araliya tree under which we were seated.

Even in broad daylight, the foot of the tree was not visible to anyone on the higher ground till they got to the edge of the Christian section and perhaps to the bottom of the steps leading to the lower section. At night, we were certainly not visible to anyone approaching, unless they were very close. The halo of the burning pyre did not extend to the tree.

At about 12:30 am we saw a double decker bus heading towards Mount Lavinia, stop opposite the cemetery, with just the upper deck visible over the cemetery wall. I knew this to be the ‘last bus’, which we took to get back home after late night (9:30 pm) show at cinemas in Colombo.

After a short time we could hear the sound of an animated conversation of a girl and a boy in the air and the gradual increase in volume as they sailed happily towards us. Even though we were seated on the ground, we could see them holding hands and walking towards us almost floating in the air as lovers do. They obviously had eyes only for each other as we could clearly see even from a distance. They were either a pair of lovers or a newly married couple was our unspoken mutual deduction from a distance. The air was still but it was a bit misty as the temperature had dropped. They were obviously taking a short-cut through the cemetery to their house/s down the adjoining lane.

Now, a series of unintentional actions took place concurrently and/or consecutively: The couple in colourful attire were silhouetted on top of the landing at the end of the Christian section and they began their descent down the steps holding hands. At this time, Nihal and I decided to get up from our slumber, stretch our limbs and walk towards the pyre. The couple began their descent, hand in hand, and walked down the incline for some 20 metres.

We began stretching and windmilling our arms to relieve the stiffness in our limbs. It was at this moment that the girl laid her eyes on the two figures in white, about 30 metres away and walking to the pyre from the araliya tree. She froze instantly and then let off a scream, “Aney, magge deviyenne, holman” (My God, ghosts!). Then she recovered and started running towards the gate adjoining the crematorium, pulling the boy along with her. As they ran into the vacant space between the gate and the pyre, my cousin attempted to calm them, which had the opposite effect.

He shouted “Ne, ne, api holman nevei, baya wenna epa” (No, no, we are not ghosts, don’t be afraid) and started running towards the now accelerating couple heading to the gate, veering away from us in sheer terror. My cousin’s denial that we were not ghosts only made them run faster away from us. I could see from far that she was frightened. Even in this state, and from a distance, I could see that they were a good- looking couple in their mid-twenties.

The boy grabbed her even closer, side stepping my cousin, who was now near them. They ran past him, flailing their arms and rushed through the gate onto the well-lit lane. They did not look back.

Fortunately, that was the end of the episode. Later, we laughed about the experience. My Aunt turned into ashes by 3am and we went home, mission accomplished. I walked towards Ratmalana and my cousin in the opposite direction to Dehiwela. On the following day, my uncle, the widower and two of his children collected my aunt’s ashes.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.