What happened to my noble Profession?

Another incident that is etched in my memory also relates to Dr Karunaratna. I happened to be in his surgery when a poor lady brought her sick child. Having seen and dispensed the drugs free, Dr Karunaratna advised her to give Horlicks when she told him that she had no money to buy. Dr Karunaratne immediately turned to his dispenser and requested him to get a bottle from a shop nearby. What I remember vividly is his reply when the dispenser asked whether to buy a small bottle or a big one: “What is the point in giving a small one?” True to his name, he was an exquisite gem of kindness, and he leads the list of those who inspired me, for my chosen long career.

Unlike many who opt for medicine as a career due to parental pressure, I did so because that happened to be my dream job. In fact, rather unexpectedly, I had to overcome objections from my father to do so. He wanted me to study both Arts and Science, like the famous philosopher educationist, Dr E W Adikaram. He suggested that I aim to join the Ceylon Civil Service; perhaps, the politician in him wanted his son to become a permanent secretary to a ministry! On the other hand, I dreamt of being a doctor, maybe because of my earliest memories of my parents telling me about the medical problems I had in infancy and the heroic efforts of the doctors who saved my life.

I was born prematurely, at the residence of one of my father’s relatives in Weliwatta, Galle and had an inguinal hernia repaired in Galle Hospital. A few months after returning to our home in Godagama, Matara, I developed a strangulated hernia on the other side. On being admitted to Matara Hospital, doctors wanted to transfer me to the Galle General Hospital. I do not know whether there was a surgeon in Matara Hospital then but, even if there was one, it would not have been a paediatric surgeon. Our family doctor, Dr K E Karunaratna pointed out that a transfer would be sure death on the way and had insisted on immediate surgery. I do not know who operated on me but was told that Dr Karunaratna did the anaesthesia, probably holding a Chloroform mask over my face. Thanks to Dr Karunaratna, I survived to tell the tale and remember taking great pride in showing off my inguinal scars, pointing to ‘Matara para’ and ‘Galu para’!

Another incident that is etched in my memory also relates to Dr Karunaratna. I happened to be in his surgery when a poor lady brought her sick child. Having seen and dispensed the drugs free, Dr Karunaratna advised her to give Horlicks when she told him that she had no money to buy. Dr Karunaratne immediately turned to his dispenser and requested him to get a bottle from a shop nearby. What I remember vividly is his reply when the dispenser asked whether to buy a small bottle or a big one: “What is the point in giving a small one?” True to his name, he was an exquisite gem of kindness, and he leads the list of those who inspired me, for my chosen long career.

In a career lasting 46 years, divided equally between Sri Lanka and my adopted ‘fatherland’, I have served my patients going beyond the call of my duty. Not that I have not made mistakes, after all I am human, but have always learned from my mistakes. What concerns me increasingly is the lack of care and concern of the younger members of my profession and it is no surprise that the public no longer consider ours to be a noble profession.

More than the individual behaviour, it is the behaviour of the medical profession as a group that causes me concern. I have written in the past about the near criminal behaviour of the GMOA (Government Medical Officers Association) with lightning strikes, giving flimsy excuses, showing no concern for poor patients. Unfortunately, this bug seems to have infested British doctors as well and the BMA seems to be following the GMOA! As I am not aware of the details of the current trade union action of the GMOA, I shall not comment except to say that, as a distant observer, I find it difficult to grasp how doctors can make the lives of the poor even worse but their actions seem overshadowed by the intransigent, idiotic attitude of the Minister of Health, himself a doctor! ‘Labour-trouble-free era’ of the Malimawa government too seems to be another mirage!!

Patients waiting in a state-run hospital during a recent GMOA strike

British Medical Association (BMA) is a rich and powerful organisation, trade union activities being a part of its remit, and calls itself “the trade union and professional body for doctors in the UK.” It has a membership close to 200,000 and has several committees looking after individual groups, “Junior Doctors Committee” being one of the biggest and most powerful.

Demanding a salary increase of over 35%, on the basis that annual salary increases granted have fallen cumulatively behind inflation, Junior doctors went on strike in March 2023. As they had no progress with the then Conservative government, they had another strike in 2023 to coincide with the Conservative party annual conference which helped Labour in getting 411 out of 631 seats in the UK parliament in the July 2024 election. They were adequately rewarded as the incoming Labour government gave junior doctors an unprecedented 28.9% pay rise and allowed a name change to ‘Resident Doctors’, in addition.

Despite initial agreement, resident doctors were balloted and they have continued with strikes demanding a further pay rise of 26%! Resident doctors have been on strike for 59 days since March 2023. Refusing an above-inflation pay hike they have started a six-day strike from 7th April, the day after Easter weekend, the 15th round of strikes, and have a mandate to continue with strikes till August. At present, Consultants are being paid huge amounts to cover the work of resident doctors. So far, the strikes have cost £3 billion and it is estimated that each day of strikes cost the taxpayer £50 million!

BMA is attempting to get Consultants too to join and is balloting them. It would be interesting to see what happens. The government is preparing for monthly walk outs and are considering utilising other staff to do the work of doctors. In the UK, doctors have already lost out a lot, and prolonged strikes are bound to have an adverse effect. That is not the most important point. Despite the government giving a huge pay rise, the heartlessness of the medical profession demanding a further unrealistic pay rise when the rest of the populace is suffering due to the madness of the ‘Leader of the Free World’, is beyond comprehension. It is no surprise that the initial public support for the doctors’ strikes has rapidly declined.

When those who should show care and concern for their fellow citizens most are behaving in the most irresponsible manner, I am left wondering what happened to my noble profession? With all the technological innovations, what has this world come to? Perhaps, we do not have to fear robots as most of us have already started behaving like robots!

Governance, growth and our regional moment:Why Sri Lanka must choose wisely

Health implications of low-quality coal combustion: Evidence and emerging concerns at Sri Lanka’s Norochcholai Power Plant

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.