Worldwide Week of Italian Cuisine returns to Colombo for 10th edition

Organised by the Italian Embassy in Colombo in collaboration with leading hotels and restaurants, the tenth edition of the Worldwide Week of Italian Cuisine began in Colombo on 15 November 2025. Highlighting Italy’s rich gastronomy and global food culture, the culinary week will feature a collective of four 5-star hotels and five renowned Italian restaurants, showcasing artisan-crafted menus reflective of the authentic tastes and regional specialties that define Italian cuisine.

The Kingsbury: Chef Paolo Collavini, an Italian native with over 30 years of global culinary experience, serving signature Italian creations.

Amari Colombo (Prego): Chef Michele Bravo, Corporate Chef at ONYX Hospitality Group, presenting sustainable, innovative dishes.

Cinnamon Life (Bistro de Marée): Chef Alessandro Dentone, regional representative for Liguria of Mare in Italy, showcasing Italian excellence.

ITC Ratnadeepa: Chef Antonio Savino, a master of authentic Roman cuisine with over 20 years of experience, leads Le Voilà Banqueting in Rome, crafting innovative dining experiences for clients from Gucci to the G20

Lago Italian Bistro owned by the Rocchi family prepares to showcase a piece of Italy’s Lake Como

AQUA Forte, AQUA Pazza, AQUA Pizza: Chef Roberto Vicario, co-founder and Executive Chef of AQUA Family, delivering fine dining and serving Neapolitan pizzas.

Dolce Italia Restaurant: Chef Manuela Prugnoli, presenting a signature collection of Italian dishes for the weekend.

The Worldwide Week of Italian Cuisine, promoted by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, seeks to celebrate Italian gastronomy, sustainability and the cultural identity behind Italy’s food traditions. Guests will experience regional specialities, masterclasses, and a focus on the relationship between Italian food, agriculture, and sustainable living.

MeshGround announces ‘Weathering Grounds:’ A choreographic dance and movement residency for climate, care & justice

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.