SLT-MOBITEL Powers “Techno 2025 – Engineering for a Smart Nation” as Principal Sponsor

SLT-MOBITEL, the National ICT Solutions Provider, took the spotlight as the Principal Sponsor of Techno 2025, the country’s most prestigious engineering and technology exhibition which was held at the BMICH from the 10th to 12th October 2025.

Organized by the Institution of Engineers, Sri Lanka (IESL) under the theme “Engineering for a Smart Nation”, Techno 2025 reflected a bold vision to drive digital transformation across the nation.

In this partnership with IESL, SLT-MOBITEL showcased cutting-edge innovations and AI applications with the transformative potential to reshape Sri Lanka’s digital future. As the Principal Sponsor, SLT-MOBITEL reinforced its strategic vision of empowering technological progress, fostering creativity and innovation, and promoting digital inclusion across all segments of society and the economy.

As the largest engineering and technology exhibition in the country, Techno 2025 served as an exceptional platform to propel Sri Lanka towards becoming a digitally empowered, future-ready nation, a SMART Sri Lanka. The three-day exhibition attracted a diverse audience including engineering professionals, entrepreneurs, students, technology enthusiasts, and public, all eager to explore revolutionary advancements in multiple engineering disciplines.

The event also hosted inspiring insights from distinguished industry leaders and experts who shared their vision for engineering excellence and innovation in Sri Lanka. These thought-provoking sessions set the stage for meaningful dialogue about the role of engineering and technology in addressing national challenges and seizing opportunities in an increasingly digital world.

HNB Assurance Celebrates Exceptional Performers at the National Sales Awards 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.