Chief Scout Commissioner gets added responsibilities

Chief Scout Commissioner Janaprith Fernando, attorney-at-Law has been appointed as the Chairman of the Volunteer Support Sub Committee of the Asia Pacific Region, as the Membership Director of the Asia Pacific Evergreen Scouts at the recently concluded 28th Asia Pacific Region Scout Conference held in Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

He has also been reappointed as a WOSM Consultant by the World Organisation of the Scout Movement. All these appointments are for a period of 3 years. As a Consultant he has undergone training by the World’s leading certification company SGS to audit and assess National Scout Organisations of the WOSM in governance, finance, growth, institutional requirements, strategic framework, safe from harm policies and other important areas related to the National Scout Organisations.

Fernando is the only Sri Lankan to be elected to the World Scout Committee (2017-2021) and the Asia Pacific Regional Scout Committee (2012 -2017) and served World Scouting The WOSM currently has a membership of 60 Million in 176 member countries out of which 38 Million are from the Asia Pacific Region in 33 member countries.

Janaprith Fernando began his scouting career in 1979 as a Junior Scout at 39th Colombo, S. Thomas’ Prep Scout Group, served as a Scout Leader of the School. He went on to serve the Colombo District Scout Association as a District Scout Leader, Assistant District Commissioner and served a 5-year term as the District Commissioner from 2005 -2010. Then he stepped into the National Scout Organisation of Sri Lanka (SLSA) as a Special Commissioner, served as the International Commissioner (2011-2016), Deputy Chief Commissioner (2016-2021) and is currently serving his final year of the five-year term as the Chief Commissioner.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.