HNB Assurance marks 25 years with strategic transformation to ‘HNB Life’

Marking 25 years of trust, growth, and service excellence, HNB Assurance PLC has unveiled its new corporate identity, transitioning to HNB Life PLC a strategic evolution that reflects the company’s forward-looking vision and commitment to empowering lives with protection and the freedom to thrive, no matter where life takes them.

The newly introduced logo, inspired by the form of a wing, symbolises HNB Life’s role as a proactive enabler. The official unveiling took place at a launch event attended by key stakeholders, strategic business partners, well-wishers and employees.

Chairman, Stuart Chapman said: “As we mark 25 years of progress, the transition to HNB Life reflects our strategic intent to evolve with the changing needs of our customers and the broader market. This new identity embodies our purpose, to enable and empower individuals to achieve what they truly aspire to in life, with confidence and security. As a company we are extremely excited on what the future holds for as, as we build on an incredible foundation laid over the past two and a half decades.”

The new Vision of the Company is “To be the leader in empowering lives with protection and freedom to thrive, no matter where life takes them”.

The Executive Director /Chief Executive Officer, Lasitha Wimalaratne, sharing his perspective on the company’s future trajectory, stated, “Our performance over the past five years has positioned us strongly for the future. As HNB Life, we are focused on building an agile, digitally enabled organisation that delivers seamless and meaningful experiences to our customers. This transformation strengthens our ability to remain relevant, responsive, and impactful in a rapidly evolving landscape”.

99x Wins Five Awards at Best Management Practices Awards ‘26, Showcasing AI-led Transformation

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.