EFC new Chair reaffirms commitment to national employment policies and responsible business initiatives

The Employers’ Federation of Ceylon (EFC) recently concluded its 97th Annual General Meeting at the BMICH.

At this general meeting, the Board of Trustees and Council Members representing different employer groups were appointed for the financial year 2026/27.

The outgoing Chairman Dinesh Weerakkody expressed his appreciation to the council, members and EFC Secretariat for the invaluable support extended to him throughout his tenure.

Commercial Bank of Ceylon PLC Managing Director and CEO Sanath Manatunge was appointed as the new EFC Chairman while Lanka Aluminium Industries PLC Group Chairman and Managing Director Dinal Peiris was appointed as Vice Chairman.

In his inaugural address, Manatunge, while underlining the significance of the Federation, stated that, as the National Employers’ Organisation, the EFC would continue to contribute to labour law reforms that support future-ready businesses while driving responsible business initiatives.

Manatunge, who counts 36 years of experience having held very senior positions in the financial sector, presently serves on the boards of Commercial Development Company PLC and Commercial Bank of Maldives (Pvt.) Ltd as Deputy Chairman.

Following his appointment as the new EFC Chair, the senior professional further emphasised the importance of engaging with the tripartite stakeholders to collaboratively advance shared objectives and strengthen Sri Lanka’s employment landscape.

Manatunge also represents key industry interests as a Member of the UNICEF Business Council, Ceylon Chamber of Commerce and World Bank Group’s Private Sector Advisory Council.

His regulatory and advisory contributions include serving as an Ex-Officio Member of the Stakeholder Engagement Committee of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka as well as a Member of the Project Steering Committee (PSC) for the Central Bank’s Fraud Risk Management (FRM) System.

The new Vice Chairman of the federation, Dinal Peiris, is an engineer with nearly 40 years of experience in the senior management across a wide range of industries, including aluminium, steel, plastics and packaging, textiles and apparel, timber and agribusinesses.

He is also the representative and co-partner of the Comcraft group and has a keen interest in productivity improvement and human resources management.

Since its establishment in 1929, the EFC, as the national employers’ organisation and the constituent of the International Labour Organisation in Sri Lanka, has consistently pursued its vision to promote social harmony through productive employment.  Now into its 97th year, the EFC represents a diverse set of industries with over 800,000 employees in Sri Lanka.  The organisation is well connected with prominent trade chambers and associations locally and internationally, including the International Organisation for Employers.