Ceylinco General introduces affordable insurance protection against dengue and chikungunya

With dengue and chikungunya continuing to pose a significant health concern in Sri Lanka, Ceylinco General Insurance has introduced the ‘Ceylinco Dengue Chikungunya Cover’, an affordable insurance solution designed to provide financial assistance to individuals affected by these mosquito-borne illnesses.

Ceylinco Dengue Chikungunya Cover provides benefits of up to Rs. 250,000 and covers both dengue and chikungunya for an annual premium of just Rs. 2,000.

Dengue and chikungunya can place a considerable financial strain on families, particularly when illness results in hospitalisation, medical expenses or time away from normal day-to-day activities. Recognising this need, Ceylinco General has developed a simple and accessible insurance cover that provides financial support to help customers manage expenses associated with these illnesses.

A key feature of the cover is its flexibility in providing financial assistance whether the insured person is hospitalised or recovering at home. The policy provides a daily cash allowance of Rs. 5,000 for up to five days while recovering at home in the first instance, providing a benefit of up to Rs. 25,000 and another 5 days in the second instance with a total benefit of Rs 50,000.

Where hospitalisation is required in either a Government or Private Hospital, the policy provides Rs. 10,000 per day for up to 10 days, providing a maximum benefit of Rs. 100,000. In the event that the insured person requires intensive care, an additional lCU benefit of Rs. 20,000 per day for up to five days, amounting to Rs. 100,000 is also available. Together, these benefits provide a maximum financial protection of Rs. 250,000, helping families meet expenses that may arise during the course of the illness.

The cover has no age limit, making it accessible to a broad segment of the population. The policy is valid for one year, subject to a 21-day waiting period and the maximum duration per event will be 10 days. The cover provides an ideal value-added benefit for customers of retail chains and other businesses, while enabling employers to offer it as an additional benefit to their employees.

Commenting on the launch of the new insurance cover, Rex Gunathilake, Director, CEO of Ceylinco General Insurance said “Dengue and chikungunya can affect anyone, and the financial impact of an illness can add considerably to the stress already faced by individuals and families. With the Ceylinco Dengue Chikungunya Cover, we have focused on providing an affordable and practical solution that offers financial support not only when a person is hospitalised, but also while recovering at home. At an annual premium of just Rs. 2,000, we believe this cover provides an accessible way for more Sri Lankans to obtain financial protection against these lllnesses.”

The Ceylinco Dengue Chikungunya Cover is available through  Ceylinco General branches and through the online platform ‘Ceylinco VIP HUB’ making it convenient for customers across the country to obtain the protection.

With its affordable premium, broad accessibility and benefits covering both home recovery and hospitalisation, the new cover reinforces Ceylinco General’s commitment to developing insurance solutions that respond to the evolving needs of Sri Lankan consumers.