Sri Lanka takes helm of Asia Tea Alliance, Colombo to host 2025 Summit

Sri Lanka is set to significantly elevate its regional standing in the global tea industry by assuming the Chairmanship of the Asia Tea Alliance (ATA) for the 2026–2027 term. This strategic milestone was announced on Nov. 17, at a press conference at the Tea Small Holdings Development Authority (TSHDA).

Nimal Udugampola, Chairman of the TSHDA, will take on the role of ATA Chair, marking the first time in the Alliance’s history that a leader from a smallholder-institution will hold the position. This move not only amplifies smallholder representation across Asia’s tea value chains but also positions Sri Lanka to help shape standards, policy dialogue, trade priorities, and market access regionally.

The announcement coincides with Colombo hosting the 6th ATA Annual Meeting and the Asia International Tea Summit 2025 on November 27, 2025, at Moonwalk by Citrus, Lotus Tower. The summit, which will be convened by Dr. Shatadru Chattopadhayay, Managing Director of Solidaridad Asia , will be held under the theme: “Tea Reimagined: Regenerative, Resilient and Carbon Free.”.

Minister of Plantations and Community Infrastructure, Samantha Vidyarathna, MP, will attend as the chief guest.

Under Sri Lanka’s stewardship, the ATA’s focus will centre on regenerative practices, climate resilience, fair value, and stronger market linkages. This is expected to give Sri Lankan producers, both large and small, a more prominent voice on the global stage.

Dr. Shatadru Chattopadhayay, Convenor of the Asia Tea Alliance (Solidaridad Asia) said, “ATA’s mission is to turn collaboration into competitiveness – aligning producers, smallholders and companies around verified sustainability, market access and resilience. Sri Lanka’s leadership arrives at the right moment to advance decarbonised, regenerative tea and deliver fairer value across the supply chain.”.

The TSHDA’s assumption of the chairmanship highlights tea as a shared endeavor between smallholders and plantations, aligning institutions, private companies, exporters, and policymakers around a common agenda. Smallholder tea growers contribute substantially to national outputs and rural economies.

Incoming Chair, Nimal Udugampola said, “Smallholders and plantations are both central to the future of tea. As Chair, I will prioritise regenerative practices, stronger livelihoods and premium market access, underpinned by credible standards and partnerships. Together with ATA members, we will translate sustainability and decarbonisation into tangible gains for producers and consumers alike.”

The Asia International Tea Summit 2025 will feature a high-level technical session covering transition pathways to regenerative agriculture, building climate and market resilience, expanding market access for sustainable tea, and practical enablers of decarbonisation. The Nucleus Foundation, Colombo, will host the ATA Secretariat for 2026–2027.

The ATA’s mission to foster cooperation between major tea economies, including founding members India, China, Sri Lanka and Indonesia, creates an interesting dynamic for the world-renowned Ceylon Tea brand.

The country’s leadership comes as the Sri Lankan government sets an ambitious national tea production target of 400 million kilograms by 2030, with 300 million kilograms expected from the tea smallholders. Tea industry veterans view this 400 million kg goal as highly ambitious yet doable, provided it is backed by serious, collaborative dialogue and significant investment from all stakeholders.

In response to a media inquiry, Tea Small Holdings Development Authority officials noted that the recent budget proposal by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake to increase the minimum daily wage of estate workers from Rs. 1,350 to Rs. 1,550, with an additional Rs. 200 attendance incentive (effective January 2026), holds no bearing on the TSHDA, as their workers already receive higher earnings than their counterparts on company-run tea plantations.

Paramount Skydance prepares $71bn bid for Warner Bros Discovery: Report

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.