SL’s leading apparel manufacturers ‘minimizing environmental impact’

Leading apparel manufacturers, Brandix, Teejay Lanka, Hirdaramani, Hayleys Fabric and MAS Holdings in their latest reports showcase progress across climate action, circularity, ethical practices, and community empowerment, a Joint Apparel Association Forum (JAAF) press release said.

‘From Net Zero certified factories to science-based targets, Sri Lanka’s manufacturers are at the forefront of climate ambition. Brandix has cut emissions by 84% and achieved Net Zero certification across five facilities, while Hirdaramani became the country’s first company to secure SBTi approval for Net Zero targets. MAS Holdings reported a 24.04% reduction in Scope 1 and 2 emissions from a 2019 baseline and that 39% of the company’s energy came from renewable sources, while Teejay Lanka has steadily expanded its renewable energy footprint to 14% of total consumption, the press release said.

Extracts from the release: ‘As Hayleys Fabric PLC notes in it’s the GreenCatalyst – ESG Roadmap 2030, “our journey is not just about mitigating impact, but about becoming a catalyst for positive change across the value chain.”Brandix aim to become Net Zero across all its global locations by 2030, and is the first Sri Lankan apparel manufacturer to declare such a target.

‘Collectively, the four companies are redefining how apparel production can minimise environmental impact. MAS diverted 99% of its waste from landfills, Teejay reused or recycled 3,900 tonnes of material, and Brandix has reached a 90% recycling and recovery rate. Hirdaramani’s is investing in the future of sustainable textiles through ‘Mihila Tex’ a state-of-the-art sustainable textile mill. Together, these initiatives point towards a future where apparel production is rooted in circularity and efficiency.

‘Teejay Lanka PLC has appointed as the patron company for the Sustainable Supply Chain Working Group organised by the UN Global Compact (UNGC) Sri Lanka, to promote material circularity.

‘Beyond the factory floor, the industry’s social impact continues to scale. Brandix awarded over 1,000 scholarships, while its employees donated 47,000 pints of blood and supported 140 eye camps. MAS created 2.1 million opportunities through community initiatives in 2024 and increased women’s participation in management positions to 26%. Hirdaramani celebrated 10 years of its Wonders of Well-being (WOW) programme that is integrated into its culture to make a difference its 55,000+ global workforce. It has gained global recognition for its success and case studies from Harvard University’s T. H, Chan School of Public Health. Teejay also grew its workforce to 3,465 while investing heavily in training and CSR initiatives.’

Ceylinco Life’s Green Club drives meaningful sustainability impact in first half of 2025

EngEx 2025 powered by SLT-MOBITEL celebrates nurturing next generation of engineers and innovators

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.