SriLankan Airlines bags ‘APEX Best In Food and Beverage in Central/Southern Asia’

SriLankan Airlines has won the 2026 APEX Best In Food and Beverage Award for Central/Southern Asia, celebrating the vibrant medley of flavours that define its onboard menu, from international culinary delights to homegrown recipes that awaken every sense. The airline also retained its Four Star Major Airline status at the recently concluded 2026 APEX Awards, considered among the most prestigious in the global aviation industry, which recognise excellence based on over one million verified passenger votes from TripIt by Concur, the world’s leading travel-organising app. The awards evaluate over 600 airlines globally to determine the best in each region, as well as in seat comfort, cabin service, food and beverage, entertainment and Wi-Fi.

Maria Sathasivam, Manager Product Development at SriLankan Airlines, commented on the latest win, stating, “To be honoured with this distinction twice is a true testament to the deep culinary bond that we have fostered with our passengers. There’s no greater reward than knowing our passengers look forward to that one special dish on every flight. Each menu we craft is more than a collection of dishes. They are curated to tell a story and reflect the spirit of our island and the cuisine that bring people together. We are deeply grateful to every traveller who continues to share this journey with us, inspiring us to serve food that nourishes, delights and feels like home.”

SriLankan Airlines’ bespoke onboard menu is expertly made to suit the diverse palates of the regions it serves. Each route features a destination-inspired local speciality, capturing the vibrant textures, colours and flavours defining its culinary identity, seamlessly blended with Sri Lankan hospitality through the meal service.

Equally appetising is the array of dishes prepared with ingredients sourced from trusted local suppliers, ensuring that every bite oozes the zest of Sri Lankan dining, typified by the aroma of spices, fresh herbs and chilies, creamy coconut, tangy sambols and traditional relishes. Highlights include the passenger-favourite, traditional staple Kiribath with accompaniments, beloved street-food Kottu and classic Rice and Curry. These are complemented by an assortment of mouthwatering Sri Lankan sweets, such as milk toffee, coconut toffee, sesame balls and bibikan, as well as other locally sourced specialties including brewed beer. The Sri Lankan fare served onboard is bound to transport travellers to the comforting warmth of home.

The onboard dining experience is simply an extension of SriLankan Airlines’ renowned service. The airline offers seamless connectivity across a global network spanning 120 destinations in 61 countries through direct and codeshare operations. Its route map links major cities in Europe, Australia, the Middle East, the Indian Subcontinent, Southeast Asia, and the Far East. SriLankan operates a modern all-Airbus fleet comprising A330-200/300 and A320/321 aircraft. For more information and the best fares, visit www.srilankan.com

LowePublic presents NEQ, the podcast celebrating the Power of Unequal

Indices drop as CSE trading fails to maintain positive momentum

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.