Pan Asia Bank empowers export sector as Strategic Partner of NCE Export Awards

Pan Asia Bank reinforced its strong commitment to supporting Sri Lanka’s export community through its continued partnership with the National Chamber of Exporters of Sri Lanka (NCE), as a Strategic Partner of the recently concluded prestigious NCE Export Awards.

The NCE Export Awards is the premier awards ceremony and the flagship event in the Sri Lankan business calendar conducted by NCE to recognize and reward outstanding performance of exporters. Pan Asia Bank’s association with the Chamber reflects its broader vision of enabling export-led growth, strengthening global competitiveness and supporting the sustainable expansion of Sri Lankan enterprises in international markets. Pan Asia Bank recognises the importance of celebrating excellence and encouraging innovation within the sector, as exporters play a pivotal role in driving economic recovery and national prosperity,

Commenting on the partnership, Director/CEO of Pan Asia Bank Naleen Edirisinghe stated: “It is a privilege to extend my warmest congratulations to the National Chamber of Exporters of Sri Lanka on this prestigious Awards Ceremony. As a Strategic Partner of the Chamber, Pan Asia Bank is proud to be associated with an institution that continues to be the true voice of our exporters: advocating their interests, fostering innovation and strengthening Sri Lanka’s presence in global trade.”

He further noted that in today’s dynamic global environment, the resilience, creativity and dedication of Sri Lankan exporters remain vital drivers of economic growth. Recognising their achievements not only inspires continued excellence but also underscores the critical role exports play in shaping the country’s future.

“As a truly Sri Lankan bank, Pan Asia Bank remains firmly focused on supporting exporters throughout their growth journey by facilitating access to finance, enabling competitiveness and promoting sustainable business expansion.”

Cargills adopts Crow Island Beach in partnership with Clean Ocean Force Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.