Ditwah: An unusual cyclone

The increase in the temperature of the equatorial ocean is caused by climate change

Normally a cyclone develops at a minimum distance of 500 km from the equator, but Cyclone Ditwah broke this norm; it began in the southern sea, near Sri Lanka, located about 650 km north of the equator.

Cyclone Ditwah, which swept through Sri Lanka, has caused serious damages to the country. The torrential rainfall has saturated the entire country and the subsequent accumulation of surface water in river basins, triggering massive floods and landslides due to soil saturation, which caused a series of disasters. This unprecedented disaster has paralyzed the entire country at the moment. However, it is impos sible to predict the development of hurricanes, months in advance, so there may be very little time to prepare once it is known.

Although cyclones have formed earlier in Sri Lanka, this is the first time in the history that a cyclone of this severity has occurred. That is why this cyclone is so special. Normally, cyclones do not form very close to or on the equator. The main reason for this is that the storm does not receive the necessary energy to rotate. That energy is obtained from the Coriolis force. Since that force is negligible near the equator, the pressure depressions do not receive the enough energy to rotate. Normally a cyclone develops at a minimum distance of 500 km from the equator. But Ditwah broke this norm and it began in the southern sea near Sri Lanka, located about 650 km north of the equator.

During the past few weeks, two other similar cyclones have been reported. One is Senyar. The other is Koto. It should be noted that all three are formed in a small ocean belt 50 to 100 from the equator. The Senyar originates in the Strait of Malacca (northwest Pacific Ocean). The Senyar, which maintained a maximum wind speed of 80 km/h, is seen weakening eastwards at a speed of 18 km/h. The Koto originates near the Philippines (in the West Philippine Sea). This typhoon, which maintained a maximum wind speed of more than 100 km/h, is seen moving at a speed of less than 5 km/h. Cyclone Ditwah has a maximum wind speed of about 65 km/h and is moving at a speed of about 7 km/h.

It is very clear that these cyclone conditions that have occurred in the three ocean regions of the Bay of Bengal, the Strait of Malacca and the South China Sea, within a period of about a week, are giving the countries in the tropical zone a chance to think about a new trend developing in the weather conditions. It seems that we will have to find out why a cyclone, with such a certain intensity, develops unusually in a cyclone free zone. If this situation starts to emerge again and again, it must be said that it is impossible to prevent the countries in this region from being in danger continuously.

Generally, several key factors must be met for a cyclone to form. The ocean temperature must be at least 27 degrees Celsius and that temperature must extend to a depth of at least 50 meters. In addition, the Coriolis force, which provides the necessary energy to rotate the resulting depression, must be available. Research shows that currently, the temperature near the equator is over 28 degrees in Celsius and is close to 30 degrees in Celsius. This is a favourable condition for the formation of depressions that cause cyclones. It is necessary to find out what causes such depressions that form near the equator to rotate very slowly and be shifted away from the equator. It is a well-known fact that these depressions acquire some momentum even further away from the equator. However, not a single cyclone has acquired sufficient wind speed to be included in the first category of cyclone classification. However, it must be said that the impact these past few days have had on Sri Lanka has been immense.

The increase in the temperature of the equatorial ocean is caused by climate change. As the temperature increases, the evaporation of ocean water increases and the tendency for depressions to occur more frequently increases. These events clearly show that there is a very high probability that such depressions will transform into cyclones. Thus, it is evident that Sri Lanka is no longer safe from cyclones. Therefore, it must be said that the need for conducting timely research with constant attention is strongly felt.

The writer is Senior Lecturer (Geology), Department of Geography, University of Colombo

A national and international partnership catalysed by a national tragedy

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.