Theekshana Jayarathna appointed CEO of TWCDM

TWC Founder and Executive Chairman, Thilan Wijesinghe, announced the appointment of Theekshana Jayarathna as Chief Executive Officer of TWC Development Management (Pvt) Ltd (TWCDM).

TWC Development Management specializes in leading complex real estate developments from concept to completion, transforming land and existing properties into economically viable and sustainable assets.

The company provides integrated development management services encompassing development strategy, project feasibility, financial and investment structuring, regulatory approvals, design management, construction oversight, marketing, operational readiness, and asset stabilization.

Commenting on the recent appointment, Founder/ Executive Chairman, TWC Holdings Pvt Ltd - Thilan Wijesinghe stated, “The appointment of Theekshana reflects the continued growth and evolution of TWC’s development management business. His technical and financial expertise on multiple real estate asset classes has strengthened our ability to deliver value to our clients that include local corporates, family offices and offshore investment funds.”  Prior to joining TWC in 2022, Theekshana Jayarathna spent 14 years at John Keells Group as Assistant Vice President and Head of Asset Management & New Business Development, where he gained extensive experience across the full spectrum of development management disciplines. At JKH he was involved in multiple apartment, hotel and retail projects including Cinnamon Life, having an aggregate value of approximately US$ 1.5 billion.

Commenting on his recent appointment Theekshana Jayarathna, noted, “Our ambition is to be the partner of choice for investors and developers seeking commercially focused, end-to-end development management solutions that maximize value throughout the project lifecycle. Together with the corporate finance expertise of the wider TWC Group, we look forward to delivering innovative, sustainable and commercially successful developments that create lasting value for our clients and stakeholders.”

Theekshana is a member of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (UK) and also holds qualifications in Quantity Surveying and Building Economics from the University of Reading (UK).