Fourth solo trip… Down Under

Melantha Perera, who made a big impact in the scene here, performing with the group Mirage, and several other top local bands, is now a sing-along star.

He is much in demand in Australia – as a solo artiste – and, last Sunday, left to oblige his fans in Perth (first time) and in Sydney and Melbourne.

In fact, this is his fourth solo trip … Down Under; he was last there in September, 2024.

He says he is looking forward to this particular trip, with much enthusiasm, as he will be involved with the band Redemption, in Sydney, and with Cameron Colombege’s outfit in Melbourne.

Both venues will be sing-along/dance events, said Melantha, adding that in Perth he will be introducing his MelaNota music notation system, designed to make music learning more accessible, and will also get those present to sing-along with him.

“I’m extremely grateful to Samantha Fernando, CEO of Business Certification System, Sydney, for making my fourth trip to Australia a reality.”

Melantha is the founder of Riversheen School of Music, where he teaches guitar, keyboard, vocals, and drums to students of all ages and skill levels.

He’s also the trainer and mentor of Bright Light, Sri Lanka’s first Western music pop outfit, comprising visually impaired individuals.

Under his guidance, Bright Light is doing exceptionally well … as a visually impaired outfit.

They recently released their second original song, which is an A Capella, called ‘In The Absence of Light,’ during the opening of Audiobooks at the MJ Centre, in Katubedde, Moratuwa.

The song could be checked out on YouTube (Riversheen School of Music).

Audiobooks, at the MJ Centre, is a library for the visually impaired.

Melantha Perera’s contributions to Sri Lankan music are significant, and his work with Bright Light has been particularly inspiring, showcasing his commitment to music education and social impact.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.