Nimal Perera should be treated as accomplice if bribe money went to his account – Defence counsel argued

Colombo, Sep. 19 (Daily Mirror) - “If the alleged bribe money had been credited to Nimal Perera’s account, he too should be treated as an accomplice,” defence counsel told court while making submissions on behalf of Parliamentarian Namal Rajapaksa.

Deputy Solicitor General Janaka Bandara told court that the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption had sought the Attorney General’s advice regarding the investigations into the alleged offence.

Making submissions, Deputy Solicitor General said a statement had been recorded from the former Speaker of Parliament regarding a SriLankan Airlines board meeting allegedly held at the Speaker’s official residence and concerning his son, Shashindra Rajapaksa, the third suspect in the case, who is currently overseas.

He said statements had also been recorded from several other individuals, including Susanta Chaminda Ratnayake and Dimuthu Sanjaya.

The Deputy Solicitor General further informed court that the suspect had been produced before the Colombo Fort Magistrate’s Court last Wednesday and that the Fort Magistrate had remanded him till September 23.

The first suspect in the case, Kapila Chandrasena, has since died, while the second suspect, Priyanka Neomali Wijenayake, is said to have fled to Australia. The third suspect, Shashindra Rajapaksa, is said to have fled to the United States.

Deputy Solicitor General Bandara said the investigation was being conducted jointly by CIABOC and the Criminal Investigation Department (CID).

He further said the CID had forwarded the extracts of its investigations relating to the incident to the Attorney General.

He added that under Section 69 of the Anti-Corruption Act, CIABOC has the statutory power to seek the Attorney General’s advice regarding investigations.

Accordingly, he said, CIABOC had sought the Attorney General’s advice on the further legal steps to be taken in connection with the investigation.

He said all investigation files would be studied and necessary legal action would be taken as soon as possible.

The Deputy Solicitor General also said the suspect had been produced before court under Section 149 of the Anti-Corruption Act, accompanied by a certificate issued by the Director General of CIABOC.

He submitted that where such a certificate issued by the Director General of CIABOC had been produced, bail could be granted only if exceptional circumstances were established.

The Chief Magistrate then inquired from the Deputy Solicitor General about the action taken regarding the warrants issued by court against the third and fourth suspects in the case.

In response, Deputy Solicitor General Bandara said steps had been taken through Interpol to obtain Red Notices in respect of the warrant issued against the third suspect, Shashindra Rajapaksa, who is said to be in the United States.

He also informed court that steps were being taken to obtain a Red Notice in respect of the second suspect, Priyanka Neomali Wijenayake, who is said to have fled to Australia.

However, the Deputy Solicitor General said indictments would have to be filed against the suspects in order to expedite these proceedings.

Making submissions, President’s Counsel Shavindra Fernando said an international investigation had been conducted into the Airbus transaction and that the suspect’s name did not appear in any of the relevant reports.

He also said the suspect’s name was not mentioned in the report of the commission appointed by former President Maithripala Sirisena to investigate the matter.

According to the President’s Counsel, the suspect was in remand custody based on a statement made by an individual named Nimal Perera, who is currently in Australia.

He claimed that Perera had, on one occasion, stated that the money had not been credited to his account and that the CID had also made observations in B reports at one stage alleging that he had made false statements.

The President’s Counsel further submitted that if the alleged bribe money had been credited to Perera’s account, he too should be treated as an accomplice to the alleged offence.

“My client has received an invitation from the Government of India to undertake a visit. The visit is scheduled to take place from September 27 to October 1. The invitation has been extended by the Government of India. I request Your Honour to take that also into consideration," he said.

However sources told the Daily Mirror that the invitation was extended from the Indian Opposition Leader's office and not the Indian government and it was extended long before Namal's arrest.

"Further, my client has been invited by the chief incumbent of the Pothgul Viharaya in Hanguranketha to participate in the placing of the pinnacle of the temple on September 26. This is another historic procession held after the Dalada Perahera. If my client fails to participate in it, it should also be considered as an act of disrespect towards the chief incumbent of the temple.”

He requested court to consider these circumstances as exceptional circumstances and release the suspect on bail subject to appropriate conditions.

Citing the judgement delivered by Supreme Court Justice Janak de Silva in SC/Contempt/3, 4 and 5/2025, Deputy Solicitor General Janaka Bandara raised an objection and read out a portion of the judgement.

"Monks, at a time the kings are unethical, the royal servicemen become unethical. When the royal servicemen become unethical, the Brahmin householders become unethical. When the Brahmin householders become unethical, those in the townships and provinces become unethical. When the townships and provinces become unethical, the moon and sun move unevenly. When the moon and sun move unevenly, the stars and the constellations move unevenly. When the stars and constellations move unevenly, then the night and day occur unevenly. When the night and day occur unevenly, the fortnights and months become uneven. When the fortnights and months become uneven, winds blow unevenly and in the wrong direction. When winds blow unevenly and in the wrong directions, deities become disturbed. When the deities become disturbed, the sky does not bring proper rainfall. When there is no proper rainfall, the grains ripen unevenly. When humans eat unevenly ripened grains, their life span is shortened, and they lose their beauty and power and are struck by many ailments.

Monks, at a time the kings are ethical the opposite to the above happens. When cattle are crossing a (waterway), if the leading bull goes crooked, all of them go crooked as the leading one has gone crooked. Even so, among humans, if one considers the chief behaves unethically, the rest will follow suit. If the king is unethical, the whole country rests unhappily. When cattle are crossing a waterway, if the leading bull goes straight, all of them go straight as the leading one has gone straight. Even so, among humans, if one considered the chief, indeed, conducts oneself ethically, all the rest follow suit. If the king is ethical, the whole country rests happily."

“Your Honour, there is no issue with attending religious activities. However, this is a matter of much greater gravity than religious activities.”

Referring to Buddhist philosophy, he said the judgment had clearly emphasised the importance of refraining from corruption.

He also submitted that the proposed visit to India and participation in the temple ceremony could not be considered exceptional circumstances.

“Further, Your Honour, they say that there is an issue regarding the credibility of the witness’s evidence. As Your Honour stated in the previous case, that is something that has to be considered at the trial. However, in the manner they are saying, the suspect himself should have considered this when conducting transactions with Nimal Perera…”

“The suspect, rather than the prosecution, should have initially examined his credibility,” the Deputy Solicitor General submitted, arguing that the matter could not be considered an exceptional circumstance.

Deputy Solicitor General Janaka Bandara objected to the bail application.

“There is no such situation here. If such a situation existed, it would be good. These circumstances cannot be considered exceptional circumstances. No exceptional circumstances have been presented on behalf of the suspect,” the Deputy Solicitor General submitted.

After considering the submissions, the Chief Magistrate directed the prosecution to file written submissions regarding the bail application on September 22.

The Magistrate directed the defence counsel to file a written bail application on September 22 and directed the Bribery Commission, the complainant in the case, to file its objections by September 25.