Sri Lankan Food Festival 2026

At the initiative of the Deputy High Commissioner of Sri Lanka, Dr. Ganesanathan Geathiswaran, the Deputy High Commission of Sri Lanka in Chennai successfully organized the first-ever “Sri Lanka Food Festival 2026” from 24th to 26th April at Green Meadows Resort, Chennai.

The Festival provided a unique platform to showcase the rich and diverse culinary heritage of Sri Lanka, offering guests an authentic experience of traditional Sri Lankan cuisine.

The event was organized in collaboration with esteemed partners, including the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism of Sri Lanka; Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau; Cinnamon Grand Hotel, Colombo; Ministry of External Affairs of India; India Tourism, the Government of India, the Tourism Department of the Government of Tamil Nadu, Dwarka Productions Chennai, and Tarlton Tea.

The primary objective of the festival to further strengthen cultural ties between Sri Lanka and South India while promoting tourism, trade, and people-to-people connections through a shared appreciation of culinary heritage was successfully achieved.

The occasion was further honoured by the presence of Suresh Jain, District Governor of Rotary District 3234; Navin Gupta, President of the Rotary Club of Chennai Coastal; and the Chief Guest, Dr. Ishari K. Ganesh, Founder, Chairman and Chancellor of Vels University.

The event was also attended by Mr. Blaze Kannan of Dwarka Productions; Nazoomi Azhar, General Manager of Cinnamon Grand Hotel, Colombo; and Sri Lankan actor Kalana Gunasekara, whose presence added further distinction to the occasion.

The festival witnessed the participation of diplomatic Corps, South Indian actors and actresses, distinguished business leaders, members of travel and tourism associations, members of Rotary Clubs, Round Table members, and members of the media fraternity, making it a prestigious and diverse gathering.

Over 700 guests attended the festival across the three days, reflecting strong interest and engagement from the local community.

In addition, the Rotary Club of Chennai Coastal announced its initiative to donate an ambulance to Sri Lanka and to renovate 30 schools across the country, further strengthening goodwill and support in the healthcare and education sectors between the two regions.

ADB signals strategic shift amid global turbulence, eyes budget support for Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.