Ching San Lim joins Chevron Lubricants Lanka Board

Chevron Lubricants Lanka PLC has appointed Ching San Lim to its Board as a Non-Executive Director.

Lim currently leads the Global Finance function for Chevron’s Base Oil and Finished Lubricants business and is based in Singapore. Prior to assuming his current role in October 2025, he led the regional finance function for all of Chevron’s International Fuels and Lubricants businesses since 2020, where he and his team engaged in a wide spectrum of activities, from financial reporting, decision analysis, business planning, project economics and management, to tax planning and optimisation.

He first joined Chevron in 2005 as an experienced hire and held various positions in Singapore including an assignment in Global Downstream Comptroller’s office. He is also an alumnus of the Chevron Global Finance Development Program, where he completed assignments in Upstream Asia Pacific, Downstream financial analysis, corporate accounting policy and external reporting, and corporate financial and competitor analysis while based in Chevron’s US headquarters.

In addition to his US expatriate assignment, he also spent time in the Republic of Korea from 2017 to 2020, as Adviser to Chevron Korea Country Chairman. In this role, he collaborated and provided support to a variety of stakeholders, including senior executive Chevron directors on the GS Caltex Board of Directors. GS Caltex is 50% owned by Chevron and operates the fourth largest integrated refinery in the world.

Lim is an experienced director and has previously served as a non-executive director on the board of the Singapore Refining Company, Changi Airport Fuel Hydrant Installation Ltd. and Changi Into-Plane Services Ltd., Afriquia Lubrifiants Maroc as well as a member of the audit committee in the Singapore Refining Company.

He graduated with a Bachelor of Accountancy (minor in Information Technology) from Nanyang Technological University of Singapore in 2001. He joined KPMG upon graduation and worked with them as an external auditor till he joined Chevron in 2005. He is also a Chartered Accountant of Singapore.

Lim does not serve on any other Chevron Company Board as at 1 January 2026.