NTB partners NCE to strengthen support for Sri Lankan exporters

From left: NTB Senior Manager Development Banking Dhanushka Priyadarshana, Vice President – Commercial Banking Naveen Anthonypillai, Executive Vice President – Commercial Banking Arosha Liyanaarachchi, NCE Secretary General/CEO Shiham Marikar and Chief Operating Officer Inoka Perera

Nations Trust Bank (NTB) partnered with the National Chamber of Exporters of Sri Lanka (NCE) to support Sri Lankan exporters and strengthen export-led economic growth across the country. Through this collaboration, both NTB and NCE will work together to enable exporters through networking opportunities, extensive knowledge sharing platforms, recognition initiatives, and practical business enablement programs.

The partnership reflects the bank’s continued commitment to empowering Sri Lanka’s export sector by elevating entrepreneurs to build resilience, access new market opportunities, embed sustainability and deploy tools to increase productivity and become market leaders through long-term planning. By combining NTB’s financial expertise and digital banking solutions with NCE’s industry platform, the initiative aims to equip exporters with the insights, tools, and capabilities needed to enhance competitiveness in global markets. NTB’s Commercial Banking supports Sri Lankan entrepreneurs with customised financing, trade and digital solutions designed to help businesses to scale up and gain competitive advantage in international markets. The Bank enables exporters to strengthen operational efficiency, expand market access, and pursue long term growth through expert advisory services tailor made for each business. These solutions are closely aligned with Sri Lanka’s national ambition of fostering a dynamic, export-driven economy and positioning the country as a competitive export hub in the region.

Commenting on the partnership, NTB Executive Vice President – Commercial Banking Arosha Liyanaarachchi said: “Sri Lankan exporters have demonstrated a remarkable growth trajectory, keeping businesses moving, communities employed, and connecting the country to global markets as a key export hub. Through our partnership with NCE, we are pleased to stand alongside this dynamic community, creating value for stakeholders and supporting sustained growth with customised solutions for all export businesses covering the entire country. By leveraging NTB’s financial expertise together with NCE’s strong industry collaboration platform, we aim to empower exporters to grow confidently and sustainably.”