Government undecided over bringing new Constitution: Nalinda

Colombo, July 22 (Daily Mirror) - Even after nearly two years since the Government came into power, Cabinet spokesman Minister Nalinda Jayatissa said yesterday the Government has still not decided whether to bring in a new Constitution.

He told the weekly Cabinet briefing that however, the Government has ample time to enact a new Constitution within its tenure.

The Minister was responding to a question that the Government promised to abolish the Executive Presidency and bring in a new Constitution and whether the Government is now hoping to go ahead with the amendments.

"We have not decided, as a Government, whether to bring in a New Constitution and what Acts have to be amended. We will reveal it at the right time. Whatever we will do, will be done for the wellbeing of the people," he said.

The Minister said the Constitutional Assembly appointed by previous Governments have met on 82 occasions to discuss about a new Constitution and that there are various opinions about the report of the Constitutional Assembly Steering Committee.

"We can pass a new Constitution within our tenure with the approval of the people. We have obtained the mandate to enact a new Constitution. We need to give an opportunity to the public and discuss it in Parliament for a sufficient time," he said.

Responding to a question that the previous Governments brought in amendments to the Constitution on various occasions for certain purposes and that the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) was the first party to come forward against such amendments however, the very party in office now is acting contrary to that and trying to bring in amendment to the Constitution to increase retirement age of the judges, the Minister said the JVP had not always objected to Constitutional amendments and that the party supported the 17th Amendment which introduced independent commissions.

The National People's Power (NPP) promised in its election manifesto to bring in a new Constitution the abolition of the Executive Presidency, expansion of Fundamental Rights, devolution of Power and introduction of Electoral Reforms.