Prices realized by Ceylon Tea at Osaka charity auction enter ‘Guinness Book of Records’

The ‘Asia Siyaka Tea Update’ said that Ceylon Tea at the recent charity auction in Osaka, Japan, garnered resounding successes. The end result was prices entering the ‘Guinness Book of Records’ for tea. All ‘marks’ were for Ceylon Tea from plantations in High, Mid Grown and Low Grown elevations. Besides, demand did not falter.

The Sri Lanka Tea Board and the Colombo Tea Traders’ Association (CTTA) organized the charity auction for Ceylon Tea to instill continued and lively interest in the sector among Regional Plantation Companies and to also win recognition for the smallholder sector, which produces some 75 percent of tea.

The highest prices were realized by Ruhuna Tea, CTC TEA, Innovative Tea and Green Teas. ‘These prices would be categorized as unique and perhaps remain so for quite some time. Tea could outshine other industries which currently hold sway as being outstanding forex earners, tea industry sources said.

In passing it must be mentioned that tea and other plantation crops, for example rubber and its subsidiary products, are recognized as high income earners, continue to earn sizeable forex and by virtue of that fact cannot be seen as of secondary importance to economic wellbeing.

Forbes and Walker commenting on the auctions this week said offerings were the lowest on offer since sale no 16 of 22nd and 24th 2024. Ex-estate offerings were maintained at around 0.6M/kgs. Low grown leafy teas met with mixed demand.

Low grown’s totaled approximately 2.1 M/kgs. All categories met with fair demand the report said.

Reverting to the Asia Siyaka report, the company said Assam would host India’s first decaffeinated Black Tea plant. The state is poised to house this plant, marking a new chapter in the country’s tea industry.

Decaffeinated Black Tea is regular black tea from which most naturally occurring caffeine is removed, retaining its characteristic taste, aroma and health benefits.

Share market dips slightly due to profit-takings but records over Rs 7 billion turnover

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.