Sri Lanka is next destination in Emirates’ global recruitment drive for aircraft technicians

Emirates, the world’s largest and most profitable international airline, is scouting for top-tier aircraft engineering and technical talent worldwide. The airline’s next official stop is Sri Lanka, where it is hosting information sessions in Colombo on 4th and 5th November 2025. The role aircraft technicians is based at the airline’s hub – the vibrant and dynamic city of Dubai.

The roadshows come on the back of the Emirates Group’s global recruitment drive to onboard 17,300 professionals across 350 roles this financial year. This strategic move underscores Emirates’ commitment to expanding its technical operations and elevating maintenance standards across its international fleet.

Both experienced and aspiring aircraft engineers are welcome to attend the roadshow, where Emirates recruiters will share information about the roles, salary, benefits, and life in Dubai. It’s the perfect opportunity for candidates to interact with the airline’s engineers and managers for meaningful insights into the working life, growth opportunities and career progression within Emirates. Those interested must register for the roadshow via https://forms.office.com/r/17kjVvhUrs

Jaber Mohamed, Emirates Country Manager for Sri Lanka and Maldives said: “Our engineers enjoy a rewarding career in Dubai, working on the world’s largest fleet of widebody aircraft as part of a dynamic, multicultural team of talented professionals. We’ve invested of US$950 million to build a new ultra-modern engineering facility at Dubai World Central. Those who come onboard Emirates will have the opportunity to work, learn, and push the boundaries of engineering and innovation at this new facility, which will be one of the largest and most advanced in commercial aviation. It will also be equipped to handle the full gamut of specialist aircraft engineering services. We are building a future-ready workforce capable of supporting our global operations with precision and excellence.”

Emirates Engineering is among the world’s most technologically advanced aircraft maintenance facilities. GCAA CAR V approved, Emirates Engineering supports the airline’s fleet of Airbus and Boeing aircraft, which are the world’s largest. and the fleet of 30 other airlines through third-party maintenance contracts.

Construction on Phase 1 of Emirates’ engineering facility at Dubai World Central began in 2024 with an expected completed time of 2027. Spread over 1 million square metres, it is purpose-built to support Emirates’ aircraft fleet and operating requirements into the 2040s. It will also be a centre of excellence for commercial aviation engineering services in the Middle East, with spare capacity potentially offered to other airline operators. Emirates engineers will be at the very heart of this groundbreaking facility, from leading routine aircraft checks, bespoke paint jobs, light to heavy maintenance programmes, and engine repair and testing, to carrying out full cabin interior fitouts and aircraft conversions.

Emirates offers a competitive tax-free salary, eligibility for profit share, excellent medical insurance, life insurance, education allowance and concessional cargo and deeply discounted flight tickets for self, family and friends. Employees also have access to the Emirates Platinum card that offers a range of exclusive privileges and discounts to employees and dependents across thousands of brand and retail stores, clubs, clinics, hospitality outlets, locally and globally.

Those who join will lead a cosmopolitan lifestyle in vibrant Dubai, living with 200 nationalities in a city renowned for its hotels, restaurants, food scene, leisure activities and for being one of the safest in the world.

Janashakthi Finance expands footprint in Eastern region with new branch opening in Kalmunai

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.