US ICE arrests Lankan with alleged history of sex crimes working as college professor

US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) law enforcement officers arrested Sumith Gunasekera, a criminal illegal alien sex offender from Sri Lanka, in Detroit on 12 November 2025. During processing, Gunasekera claimed to be employed as an associate professor for Ferris State University in Big Rapids, Michigan.

On 28 August 1998, Gunasekera was arrested by the Peel Regional Police in Brampton, Ontario for uttering death threats. He was arrested again just three days later again for invitation to sexual touching and sexual interference. Gunasekera admitted to officers that this charge was related to a minor.

On 12 November 1998, a criminal court in Brampton, Ontario convicted Gunasekera for utter threat to cause death or bodily harm and sexual interference and sentenced him to 1 month of incarceration and 1 year of probation.

On 25 September 2003, the Metropolitan Police Department in Las Vegas arrested Gunasekera for open and gross lewdness.

On 16 January 2004, the Las Vegas Justice Court convicted Gunasekera of disorderly conduct and sentenced him to fines.

“It’s sickening that a sex offender was working as a professor on an American college campus and was given access to vulnerable students to potentially victimise them,” said US Assistant Secretary Tricia McLaughlin. “Thanks to the brave ICE law enforcement officers, this sicko is behind bars and no longer able to prey on Americans. His days of exploiting the immigration system are OVER. Under President Trump and Secretary Noem, criminals are not welcome in the US”.

Gunasekera entered the US in February 1998, left for Canada, and returned later that year on a student visa. It was later discovered, when he applied for a change of status with US Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) in 2012, that he was convicted of crimes in Canada.

Gunasekera remains in ICE custody pending further immigration proceedings. (Source: https://www.dhs.gov/news/2025/11/25/ice-detroit-arrests-criminal-illegal-alien-history-sex-crimes-working-college)