Bravo Mr. President but please address the reality of your people too

In a span of over one and a half years in office, you have lived up to your word and a kept a key election pledge that those who were embroiled in corruption in the previous governments would be taken to task and justice would be served to the people of this nation.

Some key political figures are now in jail while some others are facing allegations in front of the Bribery and Corruption Commission. You did not consider their position seniority or even their power, but instead you did what you pledged.

While the opposition is crying foul stating that this is a political witch hunt, your decision remains firm in serving justice to the 22 million people of this nation who voted you in with much hope and encouragement that you would bring in a system change.

Trust me, as a journalist myself, it was quite frustrating and painful to see my country suffer and see my fellow countrymen queue up for their basic essentials such as medicines, fuel or even food. And worse, the shame we all faced when our own government declared bankruptcy was nothing short of an embarrassment. Was it our fault that led to this? Definitely not. It was years and years of mismanagement by the very people we voted in to power and who we believed in, to transform our nation into an international financial hub, with a steady economy, a strong currency, a better education system, stronger employment opportunities and a better living standard for our children.

These pledges just remained words by the previous governments. Instead some politicians who were voted into power converted politics into business with their own commissions and deals and easy access to state funds for their personal use. Finally, as a nation we suffered as we ran out of money and essentials. The world focused on us as a country who was starving while some even pitied us.

While all this you have done with a vision as the President of this country, lets now talk about the other side of reality too. While you are commended daily for going after the wrongdoers, Mr. President see out your window and hear the sufferings of your people.

The cost of living is still soaring and people are unable to meet their basics. With the income levels of the common man still very low, what relief are these people getting? Many families in the most poorest parts of the country are surviving on barely one meal a day. In some areas even access to clean water remains a challenge.

Farmers have begun island wide protests urging your government to announce a guaranteed minimum price on paddy and reductions in the prices of fertilizer. They say the present proposed price by the government is still not sufficient and some mill owners do not purchase at the quoted rate. It was of course a welcome sight to see your Agriculture Minister K.D. Lal Kantha assuring that the government would blacklist the mill owners who do not adhere to the government rate but considering the present crisis it may be advisable to sit with the farmers and thrash out the issues. As a blow to our rice will be a blow to our stomachs.

Then comes the issue of taxes! Your government seems to be taxing anything, everything and everyone to keep in line with the IMF conditions but have you even once considered how your people will pay? In order to increase state revenue, you have burdened your people with so much of taxes that many small time businesses have been forced to shut while some prominent names have relocated to other markets. Mr. President you were a man who pledged to renegotiate the terms and conditions with the IMF if you came to power so that the people are not unfairly burdened, but that seems to have been just words. You adhered to their whims and fancies to take a short cut out and today, sadly, it has become an additional burden on the very people you pledged to protect. While I do agree that businesses cannot run away from taxes, unjust heavy rates and conditions on a public who stood patient and silent for so many years is unfortunately unfair.

Then comes the matter of attracting large scale FDIs. Having a chat with a senior minister in your cabinet I was told that geopolitics is playing its dirty cards on the government when it comes to attracting FDIs. And I was also told that your eyeing newer markets to break away from this geopolitical issues where eventually the country benefits. But I was also told that your government is quite weak and laid back when it comes to decision making. Nothing happens swiftly and this is a huge discouragement for foreign investors whose patience Sri Lanka has anyway tested over the years. It is time you sit on the table and guide your government to attract good investments as you have already been over a year and a half in the seat. Do not send the investor from pillar to post. They will not hang around us for too long and will eventually go into other markets.

The matter of bureaucrats. Over and over I have written in this newspaper that corruption in this country has stemmed from bureaucrats. I am hearing reports that your ministers are having an issue with the bureaucrats and if this is so, the country does not lack talent. Change the system and show your power. If the bureaucratic system remains corrupt, it will eventually lead to the nation’s downfall.

The list I have to tell you is too long but for now I will stop here. Give your ministers and officials the courage to speak the truth to the media. The media is not your enemy and neither are we in any garbage dump as you mentioned. Your ministers lack the courage to face the media. Have the courage to speak the truth as in this little time you have indeed shown that you are different!