Chinese children: ‘Wealth of President Xi Jinping’

Health is the greatest gift, contentment is the greatest wealth, a trusted friend is the best relative,

‘Nirvana’ is the greatest bliss – The Buddha (‘Dhammapada’ Verse 204).

Sri Lanka’s trusted all weather friend China is the world’s 2nd largest economy. The Chinese civilization is largely influenced by the teachings of the Buddha, Confucius & Taoism. China celebrated the International Children’s day on June 1, 2026. Marking the occasion, Chinese President Xi Jinping has directed officials to focus on the well being of Chinese Children which is the highest priority of China’s national agenda.

Buddhists believe that all diseases are categorized into two main parts as mental diseases & physical diseases according to the vivid nature of their symptoms. Those in societies which prevents such situations shall hence, prosper. As the leader of socialist China which ensures the right to life for more than 20% of global human population, President Xi has always encouraged children to study hard, exercise regularly, & cultivate both strong minds & strong bodies during his visits to schools across the China (Ref. Media).

In May 1985, as the Communist Party chief of Hebei Province’s Zhengding County, he visited a village in the county to inspect ongoing renovation work of the local primary school. As he was leaving Zhengding for a new post in Xiamen in Fujian Province, he gave his 3 months’ salary to the principal, saying ‘I shall leave Zhengding tomorrow. Please use this money to buy books for the children.’

In 2019 while visiting a primary school in the mountainous hinterland of southwest China’s Chongqing, Xi directed villagers to ensure children in impoverished mountainous regions to have access to education & enjoy a joyous childhood.’

In April 2020 while visiting a primary school in Laoxian, Pingli County, Shaanxi Province, he noticed the relatively fewer students wearing spectacles & praised the children for taking good eye care & vision. He requested the children to sharpen the mind & toughen the body as building strong physiques is essential for children’s healthy development.

On 1st June 2023 President Xi while visiting the Beijing Yuying School, observed students playing basketball, skipping rope & taking part in physical education. He told the children that physical growth comes first for youngsters & stressed that sports & exercise are the most effective means to build up the physique of teenagers & children.

President Xi has always encouraged youth to develop the qualities of sound moral grounding, intellectual ability, physical vigor, aesthetic sensibility & work skills. His wish has always been to see the next generation contributing to build a strong country & national rejuvenation to live up to the expectations of their parents, the communist party & the people (Ref. Media).

In June 2014, while celebrating International Children’s day with the Children at Beijing Haidian Minzu Primary School, President Xi Jinping said…

Principal CSE indices do a dip; regional markets too finish low

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.