AMW appoints Jawahar Ganesh as new Group Managing Director

Associated Motorways Ltd., a unit of Dubai-based Al-Futtaim Company, has announced the appointment of Jawahar Ganesh as its new Group Managing Director.

In his new role as Group Managing Director, Ganesh will be overseeing the diverse operations of AMW Group. This includes automotive sales and after-sales services, lubricants, batteries and tyres, tyre retreading, and financial services (leasing, hire purchase) and a multitude of other strategic divisions. As part of his responsibilities, he will also serve on the Boards of AMW Ltd., and AMW Capital Leasing and Finance PLC, working closely with the Al-Futtaim Group to further enhance and strengthen AMW’s operational excellence in Sri Lanka.

Ganesh’s career spans over three decades, and he brings with him a wealth of experience in strategic leadership, business transformation, finance and operational management across international markets. He has successfully led large-scale teams, driven process and cultural transformations, and consistently delivered strong growth in both revenue and profitability.

Ganesh has held key leadership roles in after-sales, business planning, finance and development with globally reputed automotive brands, such as Nissan and Mitsubishi in Europe and the Middle East. His vast expertise in service strategy, innovation and after-sales delivery has been instrumental in establishing him as a trusted leader in driving performance and customer satisfaction in competitive markets.

Ganesh has expressed great enthusiasm about his appointment as Group Managing Director of one of Sri Lanka’s most respected automotive companies, under the Al-Futtaim umbrella. He is committed to building upon AMW’s long-standing legacy of trust, innovation and customer focus, while navigating the company toward new opportunities for growth and value creation.

He has a strong belief in teamwork and operational excellence and aims to strengthen AMW’s position as a leader in country’s ever evolving mobility landscape. His enthusiasm also mirrors confidence in the country’s economic policies, the stability of its government to drive business investment, and the ongoing development of skilled professionals, the company said in a statement.

Under Ganesh’s leadership, AMW aims to accelerate its transformation journey, and is looking to further strengthen its customer centric focus, while continuously expanding its product and service portfolio, and embracing emerging opportunities in Sri Lanka’s automotive industry.