MSI recognises top commercial PC partners at annual awards ceremony

From left: MSI Country Product Manager Winter Lee, Country Manager Sanjaya Adipathy, Regional Manager  – Desktops and Monitors Kevin Chung, Trident Service Manager Janaka Silva, GM – Service Prakash Ganesan, Service Manager Tharindu Dhanushka, and General Manager Hasalaka De Silva

Micro-Star International Ltd., (MSI), headquartered in Taiwan, recently hosted its Partner Excellence Awards in Colombo, bringing together over 100 partners and industry stakeholders to celebrate outstanding performance and strengthen its growing partner network in Sri Lanka.

With a presence in over 130 countries, MSI is globally recognised as a leading technology brand offering a comprehensive portfolio including PC components, notebooks, desktops, displays, and accessories. In Sri Lanka, Trident Corporation distributes MSI’s commercial range, including Cubi Mini PCs, desktops, all-in-one PCs, workstations, professional monitors, and servers.

At the event, MSI recognised its top-performing commercial PC partners by presenting a total of 15 awards under the categories of Gold Partner and Strategic Partner. These awards were presented in recognition of exceptional contribution, business performance, and continued commitment towards MSI’s commercial PC segment.

Further strengthening its partner ecosystem, MSI also awarded Authorised Partner Certificates to more than 33 System Integrators, highlighting the brand’s expanding footprint and commitment to building a strong and reliable channel network across the island.

MSI Regional Manager – Desktops and Monitors Kevin Chung said he is pleased with the quick growth of the commercial PC segment in Sri Lanka, while MSI Country Manager Sanjaya Adipathy thanked the partners for the exceptional efforts to win many Government and corporate tenders during this period with MSI commercial PCs.

During the same event, MSI officially certified Trident Corporation as an authorised service centre for its commercial product range in Sri Lanka and the Maldives.

Trident Corporation, the authorised distributor for MSI commercial PCs and monitors, has established a state-of-the-art service centre at its premises in Colombo 5. The facility is expected to significantly enhance after-sales support by delivering efficient, reliable, and professional services to partners catering to government and corporate sectors.

Trident Corporation General Manager Hasalaka De Silva said: “It is an honour to be appointed as the authorised MSI service centre for commercial PCs and monitors. This will further strengthen our service capabilities and support MSI’s continued growth across Sri Lanka.”