Argentina star hit with one of the biggest bans in World Cup history

ABC News - FIFA banned three Argentina players overnight, including a 10-match suspension for midfielder Leandro Paredes, for striking Spain opponents after losing the World Cup final.

The ban for Paredes — who grabbed Spain's Eric Garcia by the throat and pushed Gavi to the ground — ranks with the FIFA sanctions for Uruguay forward Luis Suárez in 2014 as among the most severe in World Cup history.

Argentina defender Nahuel Molina was handed a seven-game ban while Thiago Almada was given a one-game suspension. FIFA imposed fines of $US90,000 ($AU125,000) on Paredes and Molina, and $US30,000 for Almada.

The ban for Paredes is effectively a one-year expulsion from the Argentina team as the FIFA calendar for national team schedules includes 10 games through June 2027.

All of those games could be friendlies with no competitive games currently scheduled.

Gavi also was banned for one game, which is a Nations League match for Spain against England at Wembley on September 26.

An Argentina coach, Roberto Ayala, was also handed a three-game ban and a $US30,000 fine.

The Argentine Football Association (AFA) was fined $US110,000 for a range of incidents during the World Cup, including players carrying a political banner about the Falkland Islands after the semifinal win against England, and discriminatory chants by fans.

AFA was also ordered by FIFA to spend $US100,000 on anti-racism projects. Argentina received $US34 million in World Cup prize money from FIFA.

AFA can appeal the longer sanctions and fines to FIFA, and likely after at the Court of Arbitration for Sport.

"The AFA legal department will, in a timely manner, request from FIFA the grounds for the reviewable rulings in order to file appeals with the governing body's appeal committee, while retaining the future option of appealing to the CAS as a final recourse," the federation said in a statement.

In 2014, Suárez was banned from all soccer for four months, including for his new club Barcelona, and eight more competition games for Uruguay for biting Italian defender Giorgio Chiellini in a World Cup group stage game in Brazil.

Paredes' 10-game ban equals that in 2013 for Josip Simunic of Croatia after winning a World Cup qualifying play-off. Simunic used a megaphone to lead fans chanting a slogan used by the country's pro-Nazi regime during World War II.

The on-field clashes at last month's final in East Rutherford, New Jersey — which were charged by FIFA as assault cases — came after Argentina lost a testy final to Spain where the team was mostly outplayed and barely created a scoring chance.

Spain forward Ferran Torres scored the only goal in the second period of extra time, after Argentina midfielder Enzo Fernandez was sent off.

FIFA disciplinary judges also ordered Argentina to play its next home game in a stadium limited to 50 per cent of capacity. FIFA deferred a second stadium sanction and a $US100,000 fine for probationary periods.