Memories : An assassination, mob violence, funerals and wreaths

At 9.30 in the morning on October 31, 1984, I left the Sri Lanka High Commission at Kautilya Marg, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi, where I was Second Secretary as I had an appointment at 10 o’clock with Mr Mani Shankar Aiyar, then Principal Secretary (Communication) to the Prime Minister Indira Gandhi at Shasthri Bhavan in the Indian capital.

As I was about to leave the gate, Choudhary, the chowkidar (watchman) at the gate said there was a call for me and the receptionist had transferred it to the phone extension at the gate. I got down from the car and took the call, which was from a close Indian media friend at United News of India. “Yaar (friend), I have hot news for you. Indira has been shot by her guard and Sonia has taken her to AIIMS. PM was bleeding heavily, my colleague at the hospital reported,” the UNI man shouted.

I thanked him and rushed back to the room of High Commissioner Bernard Tilakaratna, who was dictating a letter to his Private Secretary Rupasinghe and gave him the shocking news. “OK, check the developments and keep me informed as I have to tell Colombo as soon as possible” Tilakaratna told me and resumed his dictation.

I kept my appointment with Mani Shankar Aiyer, who gave me only 15 minutes before rushing to AIIMS. I travelled with him and found out that Mrs Indira Gandhi was pronounced dead at the time she was taken to the hospital.

I returned to the High Commission and as I passed Rupasinghe’s desk, he said, “Mr Senadhira, you are a life-saviour. Few minutes ago President Jayewardene called the High Commissioner to find out about the assassination, which was reported in a BBC flash and the HC said he was well aware of the incident and he sent Second Secretary Senadhira to the Information Department o get more details,” he smiled raising his eyebrows up.

By the afternoon riots broke out in Delhi as Congress Party goons and anti-social elements started to attack Sikh household when they learned that Mrs Indira Gandhi was killed by her Sikh bodyguard in revenge for the Prime Minister’s orders to attack the holiest Sikh shrine, Golden Temple in Amritsar to flush out Sikh militants led by Brindranwale. In the attack code-named Blue Star, the military killed scores of Sikh militants including Brindranwale and injured many including pilgrims and civilians. The mortar fire also damaged the Sikh Gurdwara, where the holiest Guru Granth is kept for veneration.

The PM’s Office announced that the funeral would take place on the following day and immediately, Foreign Ministry in Colombo said, President Jayewardene and six ministers and few secretaries would travel to Delhi to attend the funeral. HC Tilakaratna called a special staff meeting and instructed us to make all the logistical arrangements. As we could not accommodate everyone at a single hotel, we made booking at Ashok Hotel, Oberoi and Janpath.

We could manage to hire few cars but they were not sufficient for the large Sri Lankan delegation. As more than 100 Heads of States and Foreign Ministers and top level representatives from dozens of countries were attending the funeral, there were shortages all round.

On top of that most drivers in Delhi were Sikhs and they could not attend to duties because of anti-Sikh riots. Our High Commission driver Pritham Singh, a Sikh, could not move out of his residential quarters inside the safe High Commission premises.

We decided to take our private cars to the airport to bring VIP guests to their hotels. Deputy High Commissioner Alfred David took Ministers Gamini Dissanayake and Ranil Wickremesinghe in his car and I had to act as chauffeur to President’s brother H W Jayewardene and Secretary to the President W P. Manikdiwela in my vehicle.

After a tiring day I was about to go to bed when the High Commissioner rang up and said Minister Savumiamoorthy Thondaman, who was attending an ILO conference in Rome would fly to Delhi by midnight to attend the funeral on the following morning and asked me to receive the minister at the airport. When I reached the Palam Airport, I met Wijesingham, Sri Lanka Director at ILO Office in Delhi also waiting to receive the CWC Leader.

We took Minister Thondaman to Lodhi Hotel and he said he would go to ‘Teen Murthy’ Prime Minister’s Residence, to pay his last respects at 6 am and he asked us to arrange a good wreath from a reputed florist. Wijesingham and I looked at each other wondering where to find a wreath at midnight.

We tried to contact florists at leading hotels, but all were closed for the day. Then an idea struck me. “Wije let’s go to Teen Murthi which hundreds of wreaths lying around. We can give few rupees to an attendant and get a wreath.’ We went to the Teen Murthy, showed our diplomatic passes and went straight to the hall where the body was kept and paid our last respects to the departed leader.

Then I inquired from the officials as to what time the Minister Thondaman could pay his last respects. “Oh, he will have to come immediately. We are closing the coffin in two hours time and after that only the family will be there for religious rights and then it will be taken to Rajghat for the funeral”, he said.

Discarding the idea of getting a wreath, we rushed to Lodhi Hotel, woke up Minister Thondaman and explained the situation to him. He hurriedly put on his national dress and we took him to Teen Murthi where he paid his last respects and wrote in the VIP Condolence Book, “As the leader of the largest Indian community abroad, I pay my respects to the great leader Indira Gandhi who raised India to unprecedented heights”.

Memoirs of one of Epstein’s victims, Virginia Giuffre, titled Nobody’s Girl, released posthumously

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.