Disaster relief and shocking allegations

The government has announced a sweeping compensation package for the Ditwah disaster victims, and the disbursement of money for cleaning the flood-affected houses, is already underway. It is spending funds that belong to the people and not the JVP or the NPP. It must therefore not only disburse state funds responsibly but also be seen to be doing so. Transparency is the most potent antidote to all forms of financial malpractice. Worryingly, complaints abound that government politicians are interfering with relief distribution operations and even diverting funds for the benefit of their supporters.

Sri Lanka United Grama Niladhari Association (SLUGNA) President Nandana Ranasinghe told the media on Monday (08) that JVP/NPP politicians and their supporters were meddling with the ongoing disaster relief programmes at all levels and even obstructing the Grama Niladharis (GNs). He claimed that the political authority had sent letters to the District and Divisional Secretaries, directing them to appoint ruling party members to the state-run welfare centres. SLUGNA Secretary Jagath Chandralal said state officials had been directed to obtain approval from the government members of the Prajashakthi committees for carrying out relief work. On Thursday, addressing the media, Convenor of the Sri Lanka Grama Niladhari Association Sumith Kodikara made a number of similar allegations. He said the NPP politicians were arbitrarily helping their supporters obtain Rs. 25,000 each as compensation. He stressed that only the disaster victims had to be paid compensation, and never had relief programmes been politicised in that manner. These allegations are shocking enough to warrant probes.

Those who are misusing state funds allocated for disaster relief must be arrested and prosecuted under the Offences against Public Property Act. Some Opposition politicians and their family members have been jailed for obtaining fuel allowances fraudulently while in power. So, the offence of misusing funds meant for disaster victims must not go unpunished.

A ruling party politician, in his wisdom, once claimed that all 159 NPP MPs were of the same calibre as the late Foreign Minister Lakshman Kadirgamar. He caused a posthumous affront to Sri Lanka’s nonpareil  statesman, whose presence adorned national politics. His egoistic, lofty claim drew derision. However, the government politicians ought to take cognisance of something Kadirgamar said in answer to a question from a BBC journalist about alleged irregularities in the handling of tsunami relief in early 2005. He said that wherever humans and money happened to be together, there was the possibility of corruption, but the then government was doing everything in its power to prevent irregularities in tsunami relief distribution. No truer words can be said about humans and their greed, especially in this country, where some corrupt politicians and officials have stooped so low as to enrich themselves by procuring fake cancer drugs.

No relief or welfare programmes have been devoid of politics in this country. It may be recalled that one of the factors that led to the country’s bankruptcy in 2022 was a politically motivated pandemic relief programme, aimed at enabling the SLPP to garner favour with the public and win the 2020 general election. The interim SLPP government gave away state funds at the rate of Rs. 5,000 per family besides distributing baskets of goods. It won the parliamentary election that followed, but the mismanagement of state funds and the loss of revenue due to ill-conceived tax and tariff reductions had a crippling impact on the economy. One can only hope that there is no truth in the allegation that the NPP government is using the ongoing relief operations to shore up its approval rating and electoral prospects in view of the Provincial Council elections expected next year. Strangely, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, while announcing the compensation package in Parliament, declared that the families who had suffered even minimal damage to their houses, such the loss of a single roofing sheet, would receive as much as Rs. 1 million as compensation! Sri Lankan politicians are very generous with state funds.

The success of relief and rebuilding programmes hinges on several prerequisites, including transparent allocation of resources, proper coordination, efficient delivery systems, accountability and monitoring, and sustainability and follow-up. No room must be left for partisan politics and the agendas of political parties where relief and rebuilding programmes are concerned.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.