South Asian University signs landmark MOU with the Regional Centre for Strategic Studies, Colombo

Colombo, Sep. 12 (Daily Mirror) - In a landmark step towards strengthening regional cooperation, the South Asian University (SAU) has signed an MOU with the Regional Centre for Strategic Studies (RCSS), Colombo, Sri Lanka, to foster research networks, partnerships and collaborations for transformative change across South Asia, a joint statement from the two parties said.

This is the first agreement signed by SAU with an independent research think tank in Sri Lanka, and is particularly significant, given the regional character of both institutions, according to the statement.

A joint release issued by the two parties said, “The MOU aims to nurture regional consciousness and the idea of ‘Southasianess’ among young minds, facilitate joint research, strengthen capacity-building networks, and promote knowledge exchange and meaningful regional engagement.

Speaking at the virtual launch, President, SAU, Prof. K.K. Aggarwal, described the MOU as an important step in strengthening SAU’s relationship with Sri Lanka. He reaffirmed SAU’s commitment to taking the SAARC mandate forward and exploring campuses across South Asia, particularly in Sri Lanka.

Executive Director, RCSS, Ambassador Ravinatha Aryasinha, highlighted the partnership’s potential for joint research, knowledge exchange, policy dialogue, publications, conferences and opportunities for young scholars.

RCSS Board Member and former Foreign Secretary and SAARC Secretary - General, Ambassador Esala Weerakoon, recalled that SAU was founded to enhance mutual understanding, challenge assumptions and develop perspectives beyond national boundaries. He noted that the MOU represents a commitment to knowledge, research and dialogue as instruments of regional consciousness.

RCSS Board Member, Professor Emeritus of International Relations, University of Colombo, and former RCSS Executive Director, Prof. Amal Jayawardane, highlighted the potential of the two institutions to create a strong platform for collaborative research and regional engagement.

The virtual launch was joined from Delhi by Vice President (Academic), Prof. Kapil Sharma; Vice President (Innovation and Strategy), Prof. Ritu Gaur; Prof. Ritu Gupta, Director, Centre for International Collaboration and Outreach; Dr. Medha Bisht, Officiating Associate Dean, Faculty of International Studies; and Dr. Shweta Singh, Project Lead and Deputy Director, Centre for International Collaboration and Outreach.

From Colombo, the launch was joined by the Board of Directors and staff of the RCSS, including Research/Programme Officer Ms. Chamika Wijesuriya, an alumna of SAU. The MOU was facilitated through the active engagement of Dr. Shweta Singh, Associate Professor (SG), Department of International Relations, and the outreach efforts of the Centre for International Collaboration and Outreach, SAU.

This partnership marks an important step in strengthening the historic, cultural and academic ties between India and Sri Lanka and advancing greater regional cooperation across South Asia.”