Mark and Comm named Rest of South Asia PR Agency of the Year 2025

Mark and Comm, Sri Lanka’s leading boutique public relations and communications agency, has been honored at Campaign’s Agency of the Year Awards 2025 (South Asia), taking home a Silver award and emerging as the sole agency in the Rest of South Asia PR Agency of the Year category. The ceremony took place on December 2 at the ITC Maratha in Mumbai.

The Campaign Asia-Pacific Agency of the Year Awards is the region’s most prestigious recognition of excellence in advertising, marketing, and communications. Judged by leading client marketers, the awards celebrate outstanding achievements across creative, media, digital, PR, and specialized categories.

“This recognition is a testament to our team’s unwavering commitment to delivering PR-led strategies that drive real results for our clients,” said Thanzyl Thajudeen, managing director of Mark and Comm. “Being the only agency shortlisted speaks volumes about the caliber of work we’ve been producing where we create authentic connections that resonate with diverse audiences.”

Established in 2011, Mark and Comm has evolved into a strategic PR consultancy for leading local and multinational brands across technology, agriculture, apparel, FMCG, finance and insurance, hospitality, education, mobility, and sustainability sectors. The agency’s boutique model emphasizes strategic counsel and agile execution, delivering integrated communications solutions.

Mark and Comm’s global reach is amplified through strategic international affiliations. The agency is a member of the GlobalCom PR Network, joining over 80 independent PR agencies operating across more than 100 countries worldwide. Additionally, the agency maintains non-exclusive affiliations with two leading global PR agencies, and is a corporate member of the PRCA APAC, with Thajudeen serving on the PRCA APAC Board and CIPR International Committee.

Mark and Comm was also recently appointed as exclusive reseller and distributor for Hootsuite and Talkwalker platforms across Sri Lanka and the Maldives, bringing enterprise-level social listening, media monitoring, and social media management solutions to these rapidly digitizing markets, positioning the agency at the forefront of digital intelligence solutions in the region.

The agency has been instrumental in elevating PR and media industry standards across Sri Lanka, including pro-bono partnerships as strategic communications partner for Women in Tech Sri Lanka and ZeroPlastic Movement.

“This award energizes us to push boundaries further,” added Chamanie Nanayakkara, director and head of advocacy at Mark and Comm. “We’re focused on taking Mark and Comm to the global stage while continuing to serve our clients with strategic excellence and contributing positively to society through purpose-driven partnerships.”

John Keells Foundation marks International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women

CEAT Kelani celebrates dealer excellence with memorable tours to Singapore and Thailand

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.