Paredes receives 10-game suspension, three Argentina players punished by FIFA following World Cup final fallout

AUG.22 - Argentina’s Leandro Paredes has been handed a ten‑match suspension by FIFA for his role in a post‑match brawl following the 2026 World Cup final defeat to Spain in New Jersey.

Argentina midfielder Leandro Paredes was slapped with a ten-match suspension for his involvement in a brawl after his side lost to Spain in the 2026 World Cup final in New Jersey, as FIFA announced on Friday.

The global football federation also sanctioned defender Nahuel Molina with a seven‑match ban, while Thiago Almada received a one‑game suspension.

Paredes was sanctioned for his involvement in a post-match brawl when he shoved Gavi to the ground and grabbed Eric Garcia by the throat as the Spanish players came onto the pitch to celebrate.

FIFA imposed brutal sanctions on the Argentine players, with Paredes facing three assault counts and Molina facing two. Almada and Gavi also faced a count each for unsportsmanlike behaviour, while Argentina assistant coach Roberto Ayala faced an assault count.

The global football body also imposed heavy fines, with Paredes and Molina being fined USD 90,000 each while Almada and coach Ayala were slapped with a USD 30,000 fine.

Paredes’ suspension effectively amounts to a year‑long expulsion from the Argentina squad, as FIFA’s calendar through June 2027 features ten fixtures. All of them are international friendlies, with no competitive matches scheduled.

The punishment for Paredes is among the most severe ones in World Cup history.

Apart from the Argentina players, Gavi was also handed a one-game suspension. He will miss out on Spain's Nations League clash against England on September 26 at Wembley.

FIFA also sanctioned the Argentine Football Association for several incidents during the 2026 World Cup, including players unfurling a political banner about the Falkland Islands after their semifinal victory over England. The incident became a major controversy, and critics called for action.

The AFA was fined USD 110,000 and was also ordered by FIFA to spend USD 100,000 on anti-racism initiatives.

The AFA can appeal the extended sanctions and fines to FIFA and also take the case to the Court of Arbitration for Sport if necessary. - Firstpost