ACL Cables’ Fire Guard secures SLSI Certification

Suren Madanayake, Managing Director, ACL Cables PLC receives the certification from Dr. Siddhika G. Senaratne, Director General and Chief Executive Officer, Sri Lanka Standards Institution (SLSI)

Cable manufacturer ACL Cables PLC has been officially granted a Sri Lanka Standards Institution (SLSI) permit to use the SLS Certification Mark for its FireGuard brand of flame-retardant electric cables.

The certification, issued under SLS 733 Part 2:2025 – Specification for Electric Cables for Voltages up to and including 300/500V, PVC Insulated and PVC Sheathed Flame Retardant (FR) Cables, validates ACL’s commitment to uncompromising safety and quality. ACL is the first cable manufacturer in Sri Lanka to be certified under this standard.

The milestone directly strengthens ACL’s Purple Standard – the industry benchmark introduced by ACL through its FireGuard range, distinguished through its purple sheath identity. The Purple Standard has become synonymous with flame‑retardant performance, consumer trust, and regulatory compliance in Sri Lanka. Securing the SLS certification mark, ACL demonstrates the Purple Standard has evolved from a pioneering manufacturer innovation into a nationally validated benchmark for protection.

For over 20 years, ACL FireGuard has maintained a benchmark for advanced fire safety in flame-retardant cables. As Sri Lanka now formalises a national standard for the category, ACL is moving beyond that benchmark, continuing to advance safety, performance, and expectations across the industry.

As the pioneers of flame-retardant cables in Sri Lanka, ACL had already been manufacturing FireGuard to this same standard of performance for more than 20 years before the SLS certification made it official.

ACL’s FireGuard innovation was introduced more than two decades ago, long before fire safety standards were mandated or formally regulated. What began as a voluntary commitment to safer cables reshaped the industry, influenced regulations, and elevated expectations nationwide. Today, with national certification catching up, FireGuard’s purple identity continues to symbolize the highest level of responsibility, reliability, and performance

The recognition ensures customers can visually identify certified fire‑safe cables, while reinforcing ACL’s leadership in innovation, safety, and infrastructure reliability.

Commenting on the landmark achievement, Suren Madanayake, Managing Director, ACL Cables PLC said, “The Purple Standard has always been our promise of safety and trust. With the SLS certification, the promise is now nationally validated. Customers now access cables which meet the highest standards of performance and reliability.”

With the endorsement, ACL continues to lead Sri Lanka’s cabling industry, aligning innovation with national standards and setting new benchmarks for safeguarding residential, commercial, and industrial applications.

The company continues to be committed to investing in engineering and technology to exceed evolving safety expectations and anticipating future standards, assuring Sri Lanka’s infrastructure growth is supported by cables which embody responsibility, innovation, and trust.