SLTDA Chief calls on world to visit Sri Lanka

Opines tourism seen as fastest path to economic recovery at Sri Lanka Economic Summit

Expresses confidence of rapid rebound as most sites reopen post-cyclone

Confirms most tourism sites, wildlife parks, and cultural attractions fully open

Assures its status as a safe destination; insists visitors presence can now make most meaningful difference

Sri Lanka Tourism Development Authority (SLTDA) Chairman Buddhika Hewawasam yesterday made a strong appeal to the private sector, investors and global partners not to focus solely on post-cyclone relief support, but to actively encourage travellers to visit Sri Lanka during the ongoing peak season.

“The best assistance right now is not donations, it is the tourists. Tourism is the quickest way to revive the economy. The hotels, operators, and communities are ready to welcome visitors and deliver the same exceptional Sri Lankan experience,” he said, during a panel discussion at the Sri Lanka Economic Summit.

He asserted that tourism-dependent communities, many of whom were affected by the cyclone, can recover faster if visitor arrivals remain strong.

In an emphatic message of confidence, he assured industry leaders and the global travel community that the island’s tourism sector is already back on its feet following last week’s devastating cyclone.

Acknowledging the cyclone was one of the most severe natural disasters to impact Sri Lanka in recent years, Hewawasam said despite the widespread destruction, all tourists were safely evacuated or assisted, with no major incidents reported anywhere on the island.

“This was an unprecedented situation. But with the support of the entire tourism industry and State agencies, we rescued every single tourist without harm,” he noted.

SLTDA Chairman revealed that tourism arrivals resumed from 1 December, just days after the cyclone, underscoring the resilience of the sector.

“In fact, today itself we welcomed 2,800 passengers from a TUI-operated cruise ship—the largest tour operator in the world. That alone demonstrates global confidence in Sri Lanka’s recovery,” he stressed.

He added that thousands of photographs and videos shared from around the island show tourists already visiting beaches, cultural sites and attractions, which is a powerful signal that the country remains open and welcoming.

According to him, every major tourism site in Sri Lanka is now open, including wildlife parks, heritage sites and cultural landmarks.

Hewawasam noted that even heavily impacted districts such as Nuwara Eliya and Kandy have restored core tourism operations, with road accessibility improving rapidly.

“At least one access road is open to every city in the country and by tomorrow most major routes will be further cleared,” he said.

He said the swift industry-wide response had helped reinforce Sri Lanka’s reputation as a safe and reliable destination, even in the face of natural adversity.

“We were able to demonstrate once again that Sri Lanka can respond effectively, protect visitors and recover swiftly. Our peak season runs until March and the entire country is ready,” he affirmed.

He added that several tourists who were airlifted from Nuwara Eliya had continued their journeys, while others comfortably returned home, further proof of the sector’s effective crisis management.

With flights, attractions, hotels, and transport networks back in operation, the SLTDA Chief said: “Sri Lanka is open, Sri Lanka is safe and Sri Lanka needs its visitors now more than ever. Come to Sri Lanka. This is when your presence can make the most meaningful difference.”