World reacts to ‘brutal’ Israeli attacks on Lebanon

Israeli forces have carried out a devastating bombardment across Lebanon, killing hundreds of people, hours after a two-week ceasefire was announced in the United States-Israeli war on Iran.

Lebanon’s Ministry of Health said at least 203 people were killed and 1,000 others wounded in air strikes that targeted areas in Beirut, the Bekaa Valley, Mount Lebanon, Sidon, and several villages in southern Lebanon on Wednesday. Earlier the country’s Civil Defence put the death toll at over 250. Here’s how the world has reacted to the attacks:

The deputy spokesperson for United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Farhan Haq, on Wednesday said the UN “strongly condemns” Israel’s attacks on Lebanon.

“The United Nations strongly condemns the strikes by Israel across Lebanon that resulted in significant civilian casualties,” said Haq. “We continue to call on all sides to avail themselves of diplomatic channels, cease hostilities”, and use the new US-Iran ceasefire as an opportunity to prevent further loss of life.”

UN rights chief Volker Turk said the attacks were “horrific”.

“The scale of the killing and destruction in Lebanon today is nothing short of horrific,” he said in a statement. “Such carnage, within hours of agreeing to a ceasefire with Iran, defies belief. It places enormous pressure on a fragile peace, which is so desperately needed by civilians.”

Pakistan’s Minister for Planning, Development and Special Initiatives Ahsan Iqbal Chaudhary has told Al Jazeera that the bombing of Lebanon “creates a negative atmosphere”.

Pakistan believes all parties must adhere to the ceasefire agreement, he also said, warning that if the peace process is undermined, “it will not be in the interests of any party”.

Pakistan’s Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar on Wednesday night also expressed “deep concern” over ceasefire violations in Lebanon, in a call with Saudi foreign minister Prince Faisal bin Farhan, according to the country’s foreign ministry.

The foreign ministry condemned the “brutal series” of Israeli attacks on Lebanon that had killed hundreds of people, calling the attacks a “dangerous escalation and a flagrant violation of the sovereignty of the sister Lebanese Republic, the rules of international humanitarian law, and United Nations Security Council Resolution (1701).”

“The Ministry of Foreign Affairs calls on the international community to fulfill its responsibilities by compelling the Israeli occupation authorities to halt their barbaric massacres and repeated attacks on Lebanon, and to hold them accountable for respecting international covenants and laws,” a statement posted on X read.

The ceasefire agreed  by  Iran and the US must also cover military actions  in Lebanon, French Foreign Minister Jean-Noel Barrot said on Thursday,  adding France condemned “massive” Israeli strikes the previous day.

Barrot added that he expects Iran to make ‌a series of concessions as part of the peace talks due to start in Pakistan.

“Iran must give up to have nuclear weapons and  means to obtain them,  must give up using its missiles and drones to threaten countries in the  region and give up supporting  groups like Hezbollah, Hamas and  Houthis who destabilise the region,” he said in an interview with Radio ‌Station France International.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs called Israel’s attacks on Lebanon a “premeditated intent” to undermine regional and international efforts to reduce escalation.

The ministry added that the attacks were an attempt by Israel to drag the region into “total chaos”.

The foreign ministry said in a statement that it “firmly” condemns Israel’s attacks on Lebanon.

“These attacks are worsening the humanitarian situation in the country,” said the ministry.

“The international community must act immediately to put an end to the Israeli occupation of Lebanon and protect civilians,” it added.

In a post on X, Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez said Netanyahu’s “contempt for life and international law is intolerable” in light of the attacks.

“It’s time to speak clearly: – Lebanon must be included in the ceasefire. – The international community must condemn this new violation of international law. – The European Union must suspend its Association Agreement with Israel. – And there must be no impunity for these criminal acts,” Sanchez said.

Foreign Minister Antonio Tajani said he spoke to the Lebanese President Joseph Aoun and expressed solidarity for the “unjustified and unacceptable attacks he is suffering from Israel.”

“We want to avoid there being a second Gaza. We will reiterate this concept to the Israeli Ambassador as well, whom I have summoned to the Farnesina. We condemn the bombings on the Lebanese civilian population, including the gunfire incidents suffered by our UNIFIL [UN Interim Force in Lebanon] troops, for which we continue to demand guarantees of total safety. We must absolutely avoid any further expansion of the conflict that would jeopardise the ceasefire in Iran and the reopening of the Strait of Hormuz,” Tajani added.

British Foreign Secretary Yvette Cooper has said the US-Iran ceasefire must include Lebanon, where Israel has continued deadly attacks.

In comments quoted by the Reuters news agency, Cooper also said shipping through the Strait of Hormuz must be toll-free, pushing back against reports that Iran plans to charge transit fees for passage.

Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese says his government “firmly believes” that the ceasefire between the US, Israel and Iran “has to apply to Lebanon as well”.

Speaking to reporters in Brisbane, Albanese said that the truce was “an important step forward”, but that it was also “a fragile peace, [and] we want it to lead to an agreement”.

“I know that many Australians are concerned about the events that are occurring in Lebanon. This is a matter of not just the impact there, but the impact that it’s having right around the world,” he added.

A spokesman for the Chinese foreign ministry said “Lebanon’s sovereignty and security should not be violated” and that “the safety of civilian lives and property must be guaranteed”.

The US-Iran ceasefire agreement  should include Lebanon, the EU foreign policy chief Kaja Kallas said on Thursday, adding that Hezbollah must disarm.

“Israeli actions are putting the US-Iran ceasefire under severe strain. The Iran  truce should extend  to Lebanon,” Kallas posted on X.

“Israeli  strikes killed hundreds  last night,  making it hard to argue that such heavy-handed actions ‌fall within self-defence,” she said.