Childhood depression: A critical Issue

A recent study has revealed that 60 percent of Sri Lankan school children are affected by depression (The Island 2025/10/12). This is an alarmingly high figure. When reviewing historical data, it becomes evident that these figures have been rising steadily over time, making this finding less unexpected. Even if the actual prevalence is only half of the reported value, the magnitude of the issue remains critical. This can have far-reaching personal and social impacts as shown in multiple studies (Figure 1). It is a ticking timebomb that demands immediate attention and intervention; we must act now.

We may shortsightedly conclude that there is something wrong with our children. Nothing cannot be further from the truth. It is not the children; it is our society that is broken. This is a global trend, depression and anxiety are afflicting increasing numbers among all age groups. Sri Lankan situation is worse; our suicide rate is higher than the global average: 15 per 100,000 people compared to nine. This again is not surprising, we have had a turbulent and violent history, and its effects are continuing.

The field of epigenetics describes how the stress experienced by mothers can manifest in their grandchildren. During pregnancy, stress can cause epigenetic “scars,” like changes to DNA methylation patterns, which are passed down through her daughter to the grandchildren, potentially altering their gene expression and increasing their vulnerability to stress or other health problems (Serpeloni 2017). We know that a generation of mothers experienced ample stress during their childbearing years due to violence of war and uprisings.

The other is that all our social institutions have collapsed, and the current environment is not the best for growing up. There are numerous stress factors. Those who have the means are leaving the country in significant numbers. Families with economic resources send their children overseas to pursue education. The younger generation see a bleak future. Mercifully, the country is at peace, and the current leadership is doing their best to correct past mistakes. While we should not allow the regressive forces to bring back the tragic past, we must pay attention to another monstrous threat lurking beneath the surface.

The global increase in adolescent depression has drawn attention to this hidden threat. It has been identified as the current trend of depriving children from experiencing social and environmental connections. An unintended result of modern lifestyle. Humans became the dominant species on Earth because they are social animals. Their ability to work as clans, tribes, and societies is the major strength that allowed humans to surpass all other species and gain world dominance. The tendency to form social groups is considered a fundamental aspect of human behaviour. The loss of connectivity to society and nature can be disastrous. Let us think carefully, past events have forced us to be an extremely selfish society, and its effects are now emerging.

There are many reasons and ways in which this disconnect happens, but one of them stands out. A sharp increase was seen in depression and anxiety among adolescents starting in 2012. This is the year in which major advances in mobile phone technology and several fancy phones were introduced. Researchers have identified a definite link between depression and anxiety among adolescents and their engagement in social media. The simple reason is that kids tend to spend an inordinate amount of time online instead of interacting with real society and nature; when they are faced with real life situations, they do not have the experience or necessary skills to deal with them.

The years 2010–2015 saw a rapid transition from a play-based to a phone-based childhood for many young people. These phone-based childhoods have introduced several new phenomena. Social comparison: Constantly seeing the curated and highly filtered lives of others on social media that leads to lower self-esteem and feelings of inadequacy. Fear of Missing Out: This causes users to feel anxious about activities and opportunities they are not participating in. Online harassment: The rise of social media has also led to cyberbullying (The Island 23/10/2025), which is a leading risk factor for mental health conditions. In addition, this also can bring in financial and academic stress. The incidence of anxiety related to this phenomenon is understandably more frequent in higher sociodemographic areas of the world (Figure 2).

It was expected that the young generation, being digital natives, would be social butterflies: people who are very sociable, outgoing, and charismatic. In fact, the opposite has happened. Researchers have shown that social media interactions are no substitute for real life experience.

This has lasting effects on adolescents because it is during this period that the human brain experiences the most growth and learns lasting skills. In other words, it is during this time that the essential skills get ‘hardwired’ in the brain: motor, language, and social skills, for example. This does not happen with adults as their brains are already hardwired and have lost plasticity. That is why adults have difficulties picking up a new language or an accent. The adult brain has stopped growing. But the plus side is that adults can use technology without affecting their mental health, mostly. The psychologists working for tech companies know this well, they catch their future customers young and ensure the success of their multi-billion-dollar business.

Tech companies promote social media as an alternative to real life friendships. That does not work. Anyone can pretend to be another youngster with similar interests, an influencer, and lure them into nefarious activities, including suicide in some cases. Studies find that girls are more susceptible than boys. Three main social media apps, which will not be named here, are shown to have different trends: one destroys self-esteem, the second reduces the attention span and forces addiction, while the third promotes sex and drug abuse, studies have found. They are all conduits for misinformation. This does not mean that social media use is inherently negative. In the right hands, they have utility; but in the wrong hands, the ulterior motives of their creators can cause tremendous harm.

The same studies have identified four simple things that can be done to prevent adolescents from falling into this trap.

= No smartphones before children turn 16. Flip phones can be exempt.

Many developed countries have adopted these conditions, and surprisingly, adolescents themselves are finding them to have positive effects. China and New Zealand have banned cellphones in their schools while many states of the US, Canada, and most schools in the UK have done the same. Adolescents agree they are happier, their lives are better, and academic performances have increased, studies show. Government regulations can help, but these are changes that can be brought about at parental and societal level. Attitude and worldview cannot be regulated. In Sri Lanka, there are other ingrained social norms that inhibit genuine interactions with society and nature. Our education system and associated pressure on children are examples.

There is a historical irony: the West has a habit of introducing deleterious practices to the East, which the East embraces without question. When the West finds their downside, they eliminate them in their societies but keep promoting them in the global South to ensure financial sustainability: tobacco, illicit drugs, infant formula, plastics are some examples. Limiting screentime of any type should be a part of good childrearing; but in Sri Lanka, societal norms may let parents be intimidated by ‘digital natives.’ If a parent must ask the kids to teach how to use an app, how can the parent impose limits on screen time?

The goal of this writing is to draw attention of all concerned parties, particularly parents, and to highlight the need for an open dialogue on the effects of misuse of technology. Science and technology are essential parts of modern civilization, but they also have created few genies that we cannot put back in the bottle. There are ample studied by reputed institutions, expert analyses, and statistics available on this topic. However, this issue goes beyond adolescent depression. There is a global trend of governance shifting towards oligarchies, once more, backed by social media moguls. The effects are not limited to tobacco or opioids, but political destabilisation, threat to democracy, economic exploitation, cultural erosion, and environmental disasters come with it. Let us educate ourselves and be ready. A healthy next generation is key to facing these challenges, and we cannot afford to ignore this mental health crisis they are going through.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.