Delayed polls and moral grandstanding

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, speaking in Parliament yesterday, paid a glowing tribute to the Election Commission (EC) of Sri Lanka, which was recently named the Electoral Commission of the Year, at the 2025 International Electoral Awards Ceremony held in Botswana.

MP Ravi Karunanayake, who represents the UNP-led New Democratic Front, said the world’s best Election Commission should be made to hold the delayed PC polls. His remark prompted the PM to remind him that declaring the PC polls was not the EC’s call; the onus was on Parliament to do so, she rightly said, pointing out that a government led by Karunanayake’s party, the UNP, had postponed the PC polls indefinitely. The UNP, or any coalition led by it, has no moral right to be critical of the postponement of the PC polls.

The Yahapalana government led by the UNP amended the PC Elections Act in 2017 to put off the PC polls for fear of losing them. It was also aware that its Yahapalana partner SLFP-led UPFA would have to go it alone in an election, endangering the unity of the fragile alliance. What it feared came to pass the following year. It had no way of postponing the Local Government polls, which enabled the SLPP to turn the tables on the UNP-led government, paving the way for the 2019 regime change.

Dr. Amarasuriya was not an MP in 2017, and therefore it may not have occurred to her yesterday that the blame for the indefinite postponement of the PC polls should be apportioned to the JVP as well. The Yahapalana  alliance was the political version of polyamorous cohabitation. The JVP was also a partner of the UNP-led administration in all but name. It was represented on the National Executive Council of the Yahapalana administration initially. It continued to back the UNP until the 2019 presidential election. Following the Oct. 2018 ‘constitutional coup’, the JVP and the TNA propped up the UNP faction of the Yahapalana government. Therefore, the JVP should also be held responsible for what that UNP-led government did.

Most of all, no political party opposed the obnoxious amendment to the PC Elections Act in 2017. The original Bill was to provide for a quota of 30% for female candidates on the nomination papers submitted for the PC elections, but it was changed beyond recognition at the committee stage to facilitate the postponement of the PC polls. Article 78 (3) of the Constitution says, “Any amendment proposed to a Bill in Parliament shall not deviate from the merits and principles of such Bill.” But all parties represented in Parliament at the time took the bad Bill for granted; the PC polls were made to disappear, as it were.

The JVP-led NPP came to power promising to cleanse Parliament and usher in a new political culture. So, instead of bashing others, the NPP ought to take action to introduce constitutional safeguards against the abuse of parliamentary process. Laws passed by Parliament are faits accomplis in this country because there is no constitutional provision for post-enactment judicial review of legislation. All governments therefore abuse their parliamentary majorities to make bad laws to further their interests, and there is nothing others can do about them. Hence the pressing need for a constitutional amendment to enable judicial review of laws after their enactment. Will the JVP-led NPP take action to fulfil this need?

All political parties responsible for the postponement of the PC polls are represented in the current Parliament. They are duty-bound to right their collective wrong. They ought to scrap the aforesaid amendment to the PC Elections Act and bring in a new law to hold the PC polls—under the Proportional Representation system, if necessary. Let it be repeated that they ought to clean up the electoral mess they themselves have created. Their moral grandstanding only makes one’s gorge rise.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.