National program to grant freehold title deeds begins

President says subordinating land to a legacy economy that is no longer relevant lacks scientific validity

For the first time, land ownership will be vested in the people free from political motives

The Government has planned to release a certain extent of land, following a highly systematic study, in line with new economic strategies, while allocating land required for national food security and agriculture. President Anura Kumara Dissanayake stated that the objective of the present Government is to attract to the country the economies created by contemporary technological and scientific advancements as Sri Lanka moves towards economic transformation.

The President pointed out that countries around the world have achieved development success only by being able to absorb the technologies available at the time and that today Sri Lanka is facing the consequences of failing to do so.

The President further emphasised that, in order to progress in proportion with the technology and science that exist in the modern world, opportunities must be provided for industries built on such technology. Otherwise, subordinating land to an outdated inherited economy is not a scientifically sound approach.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake made these remarks yesterday while attending the inauguration of the national programme to distribute ‘Himikam’ freehold title deeds at the North Central Provincial Council Auditorium in Korakahawewa, Anuradhapura.

Under the Land Development Ordinance No. 19 of 1935, lands granted on permits and grants have been developed and utilised by farming communities and the general public. However, the absence of absolute ownership over such lands has created various difficulties in utilising them for human needs, development requirements and in developing them as economic units.

Accordingly, steps are now being taken to remove the conditions attached to permits and grants issued under the Land Development Ordinance and to issue a freehold title deed in accordance with Section 2 of the State Lands Ordinance No. 8 of 1947. Under this programme, ‘Himikam’ freehold title deeds will be issued for permits and grants voluntarily surrendered to the State and the programme will be implemented island wide.

Yesterday 500 ‘Himikam’ freehold title deeds were distributed to beneficiaries in the Anuradhapura District, with the President symbolically presenting deeds to 50 beneficiaries.

Addressing the gathering, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake further stated that his Government believes that, when entering a new world, it is unnecessary to bind people’s lands with complex legal constraints. Therefore, a decision has been taken to grant freehold deeds to enable people to engage more easily in economic activities. The President also requested all recipients to protect their land and fulfil the responsibility of passing it on to their children.

Housing, Construction and Water Supply Minister H. M. Susil Ranasinghe stated that the ‘Himikam’ freehold title deed programme has been implemented under a systematic plan, resolving issues that existed in the land deed distribution programme carried out by the previous Government.

He also noted that the present Government has ended the culture of underutilised land in the country.

Deputy Minister of Land and Irrigation, Aravinda Senarath stated that, for the first time, steps have been taken to grant land ownership to the people free from political motives.