Aloe vera for hair care …

Hi! This week I thought I should give my readers a simple remedy for hair care, using aloe vera gel.

There’s usually little cause for concern when using aloe vera gel, but I would suggest you do a patch test.

Rub a small bit of aloe vera on the inside of your wrist and wait up to 02 hours to see if your skin reacts poorly. This will let you know if you have any kind of reaction to aloe vera.

Okay, next you will need 02 tablespoons of fresh aloe vera gel and 01 tablespoon of oil. If you’re using coconut oil, use virgin coconut oil at room temperature.

Stir the oil and aloe vera together until they form a smooth, blended paste.

Protect your clothing with a towel, or old shirt, and then apply the mask to your hair with your fingers. Dividing long hair into sections can help make the application easier.

Begin the application at mid-shaft and work toward the ends. Once you’ve worked the mask into the ends of your hair, you can go back and gently apply it to your scalp. However, you may want to begin at the scalp if you’re specifically applying the mask to help treat dandruff.

When you’ve finished applying the mask, comb your hair with a wide-toothed comb. This helps spread the mask through your hair evenly.

Cover your hair with a shower cap or plastic wrap. Then wrap a towel around your head. This not only helps protect the mask from dripping, but it also helps keep your hair from drying out. Warming up the towel may help the mask have even more of a moisturising effect.

Leave the mask on for 30 minutes. You can leave it on for up to an hour for extra conditioning.

Rinse the mask out of your hair. You’ll probably want to wash your hair to make sure you get the mask out completely, since aloe vera gel can leave a filmy residue in your hair.

You can replace your normal conditioner with this mask as often as once a week to help boost your hair health.

By the way, you may have to double this recipe if you have long or thick hair.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.