ACL Cables strengthens leadership with Kusal Jayawardana as Director/Group CEO

ACL Cables PLC, has appointed Kusal Jayawardana as Director/Group Chief Executive Officer, effective 1 April 2026.

Jayawardana has nearly three decades of experience, including over 17 years at the board level and C-suite, managing local and foreign businesses and diversified financial services operations. He has extensive experience at the board level as an executive and independent director in diverse sectors covering investment banking, financial services, venture capital, energy, manufacturing, and ICT.

He has held senior leadership roles locally and internationally, including serving as Deputy Managing Director of Alliance Finance Co PLC, until 31 March 2026, Chairman of Lanka Ventures PLC and LVL Energy Fund PLC, and as a Director of ACL Cables PLC, Cable Solutions PLC, and HNB Securities Limited. He is also the co-founder of boutique corporate finance advisory firm Serendib Frontier Capital Ltd.

Previously, Jayawardana was CEO of NDB Capital Ltd., Bangladesh, appointed at the age of 32, where he led the establishment of the NDB Group’s first foreign subsidiary. He also held directorships at National Savings Bank, Resus Energy PLC, PanAsia Power PLC, and Lanka Communication Services Limited.

Throughout his career, Jayawardana has been instrumental in introducing innovative capital market products in Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, including securitisation structures, convertible securities, and derivatives. He played a key role in setting up the Emerald Sri Lanka Fund, the country’s first and largest private equity fund and has executed several landmark capital market transactions.

Jayawardana is a Chartered Financial Analyst, an Associate Member of The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (UK) and the Chartered Global Management Accountants (USA). He was also an Associate Member of the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (UK). He holds an MBA from the Open University of Sri Lanka in collaboration with the Commonwealth of Learning, Canada.

In addition to his corporate leadership, Jayawardana has contributed to the development of Sri Lanka’s capital markets as a resource person for the Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka, the Colombo Stock Exchange, and the Business School of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka. His extensive experience, proven leadership, and innovative vision will be invaluable as ACL Cables continues to strengthen its market leadership and drive sustainable growth.

The appointment emphasises ACL Cables PLC’s commitment to strong leadership, innovation and governance excellence, as the company continues to deliver value to stakeholders and contribute to Sri Lanka’s industrial and economic progress.