LOLC Finance reports robust half-year results with Rs. 14 Billion Profit After Tax

LOLC Finance PLC, Sri Lanka’s largest and most profitable non-bank financial institution (NBFI), delivered a strong performance for the six months ended 30th September 2025, reflecting steady growth across key business lines and improved profitability amid a competitive operating environment.

LOLC Finance ended period under review with a strong Profit After Tax of Rs.14 billion, marking a 72% year-on-year growth from Rs. 8.1 billion in the corresponding period of the previous year. The strong earnings performance was underpinned by higher net interest income, effective cost management, and a significant reduction in impairment charges.

The company’s gross lending portfolio expanded to Rs. 360.2 billion, a 18% growth, while customer deposits grew by 6% to Rs. 238.6 billion, reflecting its strong brand affinity and lending momentum. Total assets rose by 8% to Rs. 466.3 billion, underscoring solid balance sheet growth and market confidence.

LOLC Finance’s exceptional half-year performance is underpinned by its strong digitalisation drive and resilient, diversified business model. The company continues to advance financial inclusion across Sri Lanka by empowering individuals and businesses through SME, Personal finance, agriculture, Islamic finance, working capital, and vehicle financing key sectors of the national economy. With a commanding share of the NBFI sector, accounting for 36.3% of industry profits, 30.3% of equity, and 20.6% of assets, LOLC Finance stands as a true financial powerhouse driving inclusive growth. (LOLC Finance )

CSE trading waxes positive initially but wanes into negativity as the day unfolds

DFCC Bank to acquire Standard Chartered Bank’s Wealth and Retail Banking Business in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.