AmCham Sri Lanka represents member interests at Washington Doorknock 2026

The American Chamber of Commerce in Sri Lanka (AmCham Sri Lanka) successfully represented the interests of its members at AmChams of Asia Pacific Washington Doorknock 2026, held in Washington, D.C. recently, with AmCham Sri Lanka President Sandun Hapugoda and Board Director Saneth Gamage participating on behalf of the chamber.

The high-level advocacy mission brought together senior business leaders from American Chambers of Commerce across the Asia-Pacific region to engage directly with the US policymakers, Members of Congress, senior administration officials, US Chamber of Commerce and leading policy institutions on issues shaping the future of trade, investment and economic cooperation across the Indo-Pacific.

The Washington Doorknock is regarded as the flagship advocacy initiative of the AmChams of Asia Pacific network, providing the member chambers with a unique platform to ensure that the voice of business is heard at the highest levels of the US government and its stakeholders.

Hapugoda and Gamage carried forward the collective concerns and suggestions of AmCham Sri Lanka’s membership, ensuring that Sri Lankan businesses were represented in discussions affecting bilateral trade relations between Sri Lanka and the United States.

The programme included meetings with senior officials from the Office of the Vice President, White House National Security Council, Office of the United States Trade Representative, US Department of Commerce, US Department of Energy, Export-Import Bank of the United States, US International Development Finance Corporation, Members of Congress and congressional staff, US Chamber of Commerce and leading Washington-based policy institutes. A key priority for the Sri Lankan delegation was to discuss concerns of AmCham members regarding the ongoing discussions surrounding the US-Sri Lanka bilateral trade agreement and the implications of the Section 301 investigation affecting Sri Lanka’s manufacturing sector.

During engagements with the US officials, the AmCham Sri Lanka delegation raised the importance of providing greater certainty for Sri Lankan exporters, particularly the apparel industry, while emphasising the need for the early conclusion of the bilateral agreement between the two countries.

The delegation also sought clarity on the US government’s priorities concerning tariffs and the expected role of the government of Sri Lanka in advancing negotiations. Discussions indicated that negotiations were progressing positively.

Beyond trade policy, the delegation actively contributed to discussions on investment promotion, energy security, supply chain resilience, critical minerals, digital transformation, artificial intelligence and regional economic cooperation.

The meetings provided valuable insights into the evolving US policy priorities while enabling Sri Lanka’s business community to better understand future developments likely to influence international trade and investment.

The delegation also advocated for greater US investment into Sri Lanka and highlighted opportunities for collaboration through development finance mechanisms.

Discussions with the US International Development Finance Corporation explored potential support for private-sector investments in infrastructure, energy, supply chains, financial services and digital connectivity, with recognition of the important facilitative role that AmCham Sri Lanka can continue to play in connecting the US investors with credible opportunities in Sri Lanka.