The Viral ‘Cancer-Cure’ story – Why Sri Lanka needs professional science journalism

Finding life on an extraterrestrial planet, discovering a treatment for a terminal disease, inventing a sustainable replacement for fossil fuels – these are the kind of headlines the world eagerly waits to appear on news regarding scientific research. Science journalists are the vehicle that carries the new knowledge generated by scientists inside laboratories and in the field, to the public. Therefore, a huge responsibility rests on the shoulders of science journalists and science communicators to convey the most accurate version of that information.

A news item about a leading Sri Lankan university “discovering” a cancer-curing drug made headlines last week, spreading rapidly across local print and electronic mass media as well as social media. The nature this news was reported serves as a classic example to analyse why Sri Lankan scientific and journalistic communities should pay more attention towards engaging in science communication and science news reporting with improved professionalism, responsibility and ethical awareness. Outlined here are five lessons that science journalists could learn from the ‘cancer-cure’ story, about reporting scientific discoveries with integrity.

Science journalists translate the technical scientific concepts into stories that are comprehensive and appealing to the public. However, it should not come at the cost of oversimplifying and making the information nuanced. Stating the whole truth by covering all the facts and details about the experimental procedure and results is crucial.

In the “cancer-cure” discovery story, the context where the experiments currently stand was downplayed. They reported that this product had been proven to be successful in targeting and destroying cancer cells, failing to disclose that the product demonstrated those results in cancer cells grown in Petri dishes inside a laboratory, and not inside actual human bodies.

Although testing on cells grown under laboratory conditions is the starting point for many drug synthesis research pipelines, for a treatment to be validated as successful and suitable for human consumption, it has to pass several other stages such as testing on animal models followed by trial on actual humans under clinical settings. The manner any drug behaves when acting on isolated cells can vastly differ from the way it acts inside an actual human body. Hence, claiming that it is successful based only on cellular testing is stretching the truth.

Should have disclosed that the experiment is still at its preliminary stages and several more steps forward are required before credible results can be validated. Could have reported that based on the promising results shown in cell-based laboratory studies, this product shows potential in improving into an effective cancer-fighting therapy in future, after animal model testing followed by clinical trials.

Science journalists should be critical thinkers and watchdogs who hold the scientists accountable for the message they try to get to the public, not blind believers of what the scientists say. Cross-questioning the scientists and confirming the details of the experimental procedure and findings through multiple reliable sources before reporting is the responsibility of the science journalist.

Experimental procedure and findings covered in the news were not supported with peer-reviewed journal article references. The studies that were stated as support for the claims made by the scientist were articles published in bioRxiv (https://www.biorxiv.org), which is a pre-print server that allows scientists to publicise their research findings that are not published through peer-review. The standard procedure in research and academia to assess the quality, validity and credibility of a scientific finding is to subject it to the evaluation of unbiased experts in the field who would review whether the experimental methods followed are correct and the results are plausible. Studies published in bioRxiv do not go through that process of independent peer review. The second source that the news articles refer to as support for the success of the product is a survey that was allegedly conducted by another leading university and resulted in 93% of success among consumers. However, such a survey is not available in any peer-reviewed journal nor a pre-print server, compromising the credibility of that information.

Could have reported that the results still await validation through independent peer-review, although the research is available for the general public to read through a non-peer reviewed, pre-print server. Rather than just mentioning the percentage success rate revealed from the survey, details of the survey such as under what circumstances was it conducted, how many subjects were involved, was there a control group involved, if so what conditions were controlled between the control group and the test group, was a placebo used on the control group, what were the background factors (e.g. diet, age, gender, other underlying conditions of patients) that could have had an effect on the efficacy of the product and how they were weighed in the results should have been mentioned, so that the reader gets the background and all details of the study and the basis for why the scientists are making this claim.

Science journalists should be impartial critical thinkers who are able to cover the story from all angles and present it to the public with the most balanced and complete version possible.

Only the lead researcher involved in this study was interviewed and only their perspective was featured.

Independent, expert researchers who were not involved in the research and have no conflict of interest with the research team in whatever manner, should have been interviewed to get an unbiased view of the credibility of the findings. Consumers who allegedly got successful results from the product should have been interviewed to confirm that their data were used to validate the product in an ethical and informed manner.

Science journalists should not be cheerleaders, promoting scientific findings through their reporting. Avoiding sensationalisation in order to make a research finding newsworthy is a cardinal rule in science journalism. Honesty and accuracy should not be sacrificed in order to make the story more appealing to the public.

While some of the news outlets were cautious to label this finding as a nutraceutical (not a drug) that could potentially help with enhancing the quality of life in cancer patients, the vast majority overinflated the takeaway of the news to the discovery of a gamechanger in cancer treatment. Any potential side-effects and disclaimers about this product were left out of the story while implying that it generally works equally successfully for cancer patients of all ages, genders and underlying clinical conditions.

Giving a more realistic picture of the finding by explaining what a nutraceutical is, how it differs from a cancer-curing drug, under what specific circumstances successful results can be expected and what limitations are involved.

While the science journalists and the scientists should work together to present the most accurate story to the public, the science journalists should stay objective of the research and the personnel involved. Science journalists should avoid advocating for the scientist or the institution or overhyping any financial incentives in a way that it clouds the ability of the reader to neutrally judge the story.

Economic profits that can be reaped by commercialising this product and introducing it to the international market were given a major focus in the headlines as well as in the body of the story.

While reporting the potential commercial benefits of the product, where the experiments currently stand and the hurdles it is yet to pass such as clinical trials and drug registration, before it can be introduced to the market as a credible product, should have been reported with equal significance.

It can be alluring for science journalists to churn out sensational, hyped stories about scientific discoveries because they obviously reach broader audiences and attract increased public engagement. Similarly, scientists can also be enticed to oversell their findings, stretching the truth, because claiming to have made groundbreaking discoveries can earn them benefits such as promotions, grant funding and recognition in the increasing competition in academia. Nevertheless, presenting overhyped stories would be like “crying wolf” which can lead to mistrust cultivating among the public about scientific findings. By adhering to professional, responsible, ethical and respectful practices when communicating research findings, both the scientific and journalistic communities can build a more trustworthy relationship with the public, where scientific findings will flourish and benefit all parties more effectively.

The author holds a Bachelor of Science (Hons.) degree in Zoology from University of Kelaniya. Currently, she is a PhD candidate in Biological Sciences at University of Florida, USA, and freelance science journalist with bylines in Nature, Scientific American, Oxford University Press Blog and Mongabay. She can be reached at

Brown, P. (2012). Nothing but the truth: Are the media as bad at communicating science as scientists fear? EMBO Reports 13: 964 – 967.  https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2012.147. PMID: 23059985; PMCID: PMC3492714.

Mehadhir, D. and Yip, D. (2025). Decoding health news: 5 ways to reinforce integrity in science journalism. The World Economic Forum, 20 June 2025. https://www.weforum.org/stories/2025/06/health-news-integrity-science-journalism/?fbclid=IwY2xjawNWIKZleHRuA2FlbQIxMABicmlkETFxbFNZQ0UwamVKQ0E2TVBRAR6jUN8HhGav9no1rfTVOXwPOrRmINBw6yZqT9POlLpXEp-1Hr_sETa_kIeY1w_aem_tuCO47Z8XT4JfOVSB6N9nA

Dempster, G., Sutherland, G. and Keogh, L. (2022). Scientific research in news media: a case study of misrepresentation, sensationalism and harmful recommendations JCOM 21(01), A06. https://doi.org/10.22323/2.21010206

Greer, K. (2025). How to sell your science without selling out. Nature, 06 February 2025. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-025-00209-w

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.