State Engineering Corporation under Kulasinghe and the lead-up to an amusing incident

In the period 1969/71, the Research & Development section of the State Engineering Corporation (SEC) comprised of five senior engineers, four of whom had graduated from the Faculty of Engineering of the University of Ceylon (Efac) with First Class honours. The four were the crème de la crème, academically, and subsequent recipients of government scholarships to reputed research universities in the West, returning to Ceylon with their newly acquired doctorates (PhD). The fifth was a civil engineer who had obtained his first qualification as a Junior Technical Officer at Katubedde/Maradana Technical Colleges, followed by a first degree in England and subsequently a doctorate.

All five were in their early 30s, young, enthusiastic, energetic, raring to go and eager to contribute. All had been handpicked by the Chairman of SEC, ANS Kulasinghe, and were designated either as Assistant Chief Engineer (ACE) or as Senior Engineer (SE).

This episode leads up to the circumstances that led a youngster just out of the University (myself), to attend a high-powered round-table conference in the company of a Minister, two Permanent Secretaries, an Assistant Secretary and the Chairman of a State Corporation. EFac at the time was the only engineering faculty with the newly formed Katubedde University producing their first graduate in 1972.

The two ACEs from EFac were Dr Nath Amerakone and Dr Brahman Sivaprakasapillai, heading up the Civil and Mechanical sections respectively. The two SEs from EFac were, Dr David Gunasekera and Dr Kamal Nathan. Even though it was at the beginning of my career, I shared a common bond with these four, being a product of the EFac. The ‘outsider’ was Dr Dayantha Wijeyesekera, also designated as a SE.

All six of us were located at desks in the open plan office of Level Four of the SEC Headquarters . I reported directly to Brahman. Incidentally, the first woman engineer produced by EFac and in Ceylon was Brahman’s sister, Dr Premila, who also graduated with First Class honours from the EFac and subsequently obtaining her PhD. I felt quite an intruder in this distinguished company, having scraped the bottom of the academic barrel and graduated without a ‘Class’. You could say that I developed a sort of ‘class consciousness’ at SEC.

Kulasinghe was an engineer par excellence with immense self-confidence in his technical abilities. He was willing to recruit and then set challenges to young professionals, enabling them to learn and grow. Though small in stature, Kulasinghe was a giant in his field. He was the Chairman of an organization employing more than 100 engineers and technical officers spread across many construction sites. SEC Headquarters was a high-rise building on General’s Lake Road, and located opposite Bishop’s College.

The date of the impending general election, May 22, 1970, was announced in March the same year. Nath, very openly, and presumably sensing the change in the political winds, nailed his colours to the mast of the opposition. The opposition was the Leftist Coalition and he became an advisor to a prominent Member of Parliament (MP) representing the multi-member seat of Colombo Central electorate.

A government servant could not take sides during an election as the law forbade such action. However, State Corporations being semi government did not come under the Public Service Act. The main difference being the retirement benefits. Government jobs were pensionable and came under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission (PSC). An employee of a State Corporation did not come under the PSC and such jobs did not carry a monthly pension post- retirement. Instead a lump sum was paid as the Provident Fund on retirement.

Thus, Nath was able to exploit this loophole of working in a ‘quasi government organisation” and dabble in politics, whilst still being employed at SEC. Although it was not strictly against the rules for an employee of a State Corporation to align openly with a political party, prudence would suggest otherwise. Nath, however, threw caution to the winds and announced his loyalty to the C coalition which was tipped to win the election. Many assumed that he could take the risk of losing his job because his wife came from a wealthy family.

Pieter Keuneman was the deputy leader of the Communist Party, and welcomed the intellectual contribution of Nath, who had the added attributes of hard work and good campaign management. Along with the other leftist party (LSSP) and the centrist SLFP, the Communist Party entered into a coalition agreement to form a united front against the ruling UNP at that election the coalition won in a landslide.

The prestigious position of Permanent Secretary to a Ministry was the crowning achievement to which all government servants aspired; these top posts were traditionally reserved for those in the exclusive Ceylon Civil Service (CCS).

Keuneman was re-elected as a Member of Parliament for the multi-member Colombo Central seat and was appointed the Minister of Housing and Construction in Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike’s Cabinet. Nath was rewarded. He became the Permanent Secretary of the Keuneman Ministry. He and the then head of the Highways Department, M Chandrasena, became the first engineers to be appointed as Permanent Secretaries in Ceylon and both were outside CCS.

Recruitment to the Ceylon Civil Service (CCS) was based on a competitive exam open to university graduates with first class honours in any discipline, and under 25 years in age. Only the top performing eight (occasionally 10) were selected into the CCS each year. They were considered as true intellectuals because the exam was on wide-ranging social and philosophical topics, requiring scholarly knowledge as well as an awareness of the world at large. When they were eventually promoted as Permanent Secretaries to ministers, they were expected to guide the people’s representatives in the executive branch in running the country. They were not technical specialists but had to understand and acquire good governance skills. Nearly all did, but they also became an exclusive club, suspicious of anyone outside their circle who were striving to get in.

Sirimavo also appointed a medical practitioner, Dr. CS Weeratunge, two professors from the University, Dr H A de S Gunasekera and Dr Premadasa Udagama, and a lawyer, Nihal Jayawickrema, as Permanent Secretaries. The positions up to that time were reserved for career public servants and the appointments did not go down well with the upper echelons of the Civil Service. There were only three exceptions prior to 1970, with the eminent economist Dr Gamini Corea and the advertising guru, Anandatissa de Alwis being brought in mid-term as Permanent Secretaries by the previous regime of Prime Minister, Dudley Senanayake.

The first ever non-CCS appointment was Sydney de Zoysa, a Deputy Inspector General of the Police, appointed as Permanent Secretary of Internal Security during the short interim prime ministership of W. Dahanayake in 1959, after the assassination of SWRD Bandaranaike, Sirimavo’s husband.

Kulasinghe’s perks of office as the Chairman included an official vehicle, a majestic blue ‘Ford Galaxy’ equipped with wireless communication: principally, a Very High Frequency (VHF) radio phone with an aerial protruding from the car roof, to aid reception. Kulasinghe could be seen being chauffeured around the sites, from about 7 am, and if you were close to the car you could see him seated imperiously in the rear. He maintained regular contact with SEC construction sites on the VHF. In the days before internet and mobile phones, this was a utility of great novelty.

There were officers who eagerly awaited calls from the Chairman, not for its practical value but as validation of their significance to the Chairman: a call over the VHF inflated their egos. Being able to shout out to all and sundry that, “Chairman called me on the VHF this morning” raised their status in the eyes of staff and other subordinates. There were some engineers who hovered near the desk phone in the mornings hoping that the Chairman would call. Such a call, even if it was a berating, made their day. Those who received a rebuke would console themselves saying that, “The Chairman likes me; that is why he sounded critical.”

Kulasinghe had the ability to call a spade a spade, even with Ministers or important Members of Parliament. Such a quality did not exactly endear him to the political class on both the right and the left, especially those without any experience or education. Many believed that it was his forthrightness that prevented him from being appointed a permanent secretary in Sirimavo’s government. Perhaps his hometown Balapitiya connections, shared with CP de Silva, the prominent SLFP Minister who crossed the floor of parliament to oust Sirimavo Bandaranaike’s government over the Press Bill in 1964, did not help. CP was a senior Minister under the previous UNP regime of Dudley Senanayake.

Kulasinghe resented his erstwhile subordinate Nath becoming his de jure boss, the Permanent Secretary of the ministry that oversaw the State Engineering Corporation; sometimes these feelings came out into the open during conversations.

The highest civil service positions were essentially the enclave of graduates from the arts or western classics streams though there were a few from other disciplines like science, maths, economics and law. Of note are C Sundaralingam later a MP, who was awarded a double first in the Mathematical Tripos from Oxford and C P de Silva, a first class in mathematics from the University of London. They both passed the CCS (Ceylon Civil Service) Examination.

Studying politics and governance and reading up on Weberian theory on the ideal bureaucracy, perhaps best fitted the requirements of the CCS exam. Permanent Secretaries (PS) are answerable to Parliament on how money is allocated to a ministry, how it is spent and how government policies were implemented. In short, the PS is an ‘accountable officer’ and administrator of the ministry. Where specific technical expertise was required, the PS would source them to get the job done. In a nutshell, he was like a CEO of a large corporation. In that regard, a good PS would be someone who understands philosophy and human psychology, and a good manager of a large network of diversified skills.

The procedures for promotions within the civil service under various prime ministers were set up by the civil service itself. Admittedly, the Permanent Secretaries were high calibre people, whatever their initial academic discipline. In this respect one could not fault Sirimavo’s new appointees.

Civil service ‘plum jobs’ in the UK went mainly to Oxford and Cambridge graduates. In Ceylon, these jobs went to the CCS, again a coterie of high calibre graduates mainly from the University of Ceylon. The popular satire “Yes, Minister” and “Yes, Prime Minister” amply demonstrated the power of civil servants to confuse the politicians with labyrinthine administrative processes. In general, the quality of politicians was so poor that the ‘intellectually superior’ permanent secretary could run circles around them.

Readers may remember the episode in Yes Minister of a newly built hospital that had 1.300 civil servants and nil patients! Sir Humphrey Appleby, the Permanent Secretary, when questioned about the absence of doctors, glibly informs the Minister that, “The main purpose of a hospital is in administration, not in treating patients.” Laconically, this episode was named “Jobs for the boys”.

I remember the Daily News columnist Rhoda Miller de Silva, an American married to a Ceylonese, praising Sirimavo’s courage for the ground-breaking appointments and infusion of talented professionals to the coveted positions of permanent secretaries and assistant secretaries. Rhoda, a radical leftist, was deported by the UNP government in the 1950s, some say at the instigation of the American Ambassador. Perhaps Rhoda wanted to get her own back on the upper echelons in the Civil Service, who deported her.

Roaming the world to tap global experience on peace seeking and Gamini D’s assassination

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.