Stifling democracy

All the signs are that there will be no Provincial Council (PC) elections next year. The government’s decision to appoint a Parliamentary Select Committee (PSC) to inquire into matters pertaining to the delayed PC polls is an indication that the ruling NPP is afraid of facing an election any time soon and therefore all out to prevent its popularity and electoral strength from being put to test. It is using the same modus operandi as the previous governments to postpone the PC polls further—the delimitation of electoral boundaries. It has demonstrated that it has no sense of shame, just like those who made the PC polls disappear, as it were, eight years ago.

One may recall that electorates were delimited during the UNP-led Yahapalana government as a legal requirement for the implementation of the new mixed proportional system, but the report of the Delimitation Committee was not approved by Parliament. In August 2018, when a division was taken on the report following a debate, 139 MPs voted against it. There wasn’t a single vote for the report, which was required to be approved by a two-thirds majority, for the PC polls to be held under the new electoral system.

The Election Commission (EC) has reportedly said a fresh delimitation process will take about one year to reach completion. A PSC can be made to drag on, delaying the PC polls indefinitely. This seems to be the NPP’s battle plan. It is said that when a government fears the people, there is liberty. But when a government fears elections, democracy is in jeopardy. Since 2017, three governments have kept the PC polls in limbo by refusing to take action to hold them.

The PC polls can be held in a few months if Parliament resolves that they be conducted under the Proportional Representation (PR) system, election monitors and former EC Chairman Mahinda Deshapriya have said, urging the government and the Opposition to do away with the legal obstacles to the conduct of the PC polls fast, but the NPP government is sure to block any such attempt. Deshapriya is of the view that the PCs have been kept under the Governors in violation of a Supreme Court ruling. Emboldened by a string of defeats the NPP has suffered in cooperative society elections and in budget votes at some local government institutions, during the past several months, the Opposition is now pressuring the government to amend the PC Elections Act, enabling the PC polls to be held under the PR system, as in the past.

Ironically, some election monitors have urged the NPP government either to hold the PC polls expeditiously or to decide whether to retain the PCs, as it is antithetical to democracy to allow the PCs to be kept under the President through the Provincial Governors appointed by him. An opportunity has now presented itself for the JVP to fulfil its vow to do away with the PC system. The JVP drove thousands of its cadres to take up arms and lay down their lives in the name of a campaign to scuttle the PC system, among others, in the late 1980s The JVP leaders were seen recently commemorating the party members killed during their abortive uprising. They have made an about-turn on that vow, and are all out to retain control of the PCs by postponing elections further.

The Opposition is pretending that its leaders and members had nothing to do with the postponement of the PC polls. But they helped the  Yahapalana government amend the PC Elections Act in 2017 to put off elections on the pretext of increasing female representation in the PCs. Most of the SJB MPs who were in the UNP at the time, the JVP, those who are in the SLPP at present, the SLMC, the TNA, etc., facilitated the passage of an amendment bill, which was changed beyond recognition at the committee stage, with a slew of sections smuggled into it to pave the way for the postponement of the PC polls as the UNP-led Yahapalana government was scared of facing an electoral contest.

Shame on both the JVP-led NPP, which is bent on delaying the PC polls further, and the Opposition, which has opted for ‘floating like a bee and stinging like a butterfly’ instead of launching an all-out campaign to pressure the government to legislate for the PC polls to be held fast under the PR system!

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.