How the ‘Lost Tribes of Israel’ help in understanding Mid-East peace issues

Reports that the Israeli authorities have given the ‘go ahead’ for the repatriation and integration into the Israeli populace of some survivors in parts of India from what are described as the ‘Lost Tribes of Israel’, bring up a subject that merits continuous and focused research. The contemporary observer of international politics seeking to understand more thoroughly the factors fueling the Middle East conflict and the crucial role identity issues play in it would, no doubt, be the biggest beneficiary of such research.

In the global South in general there has hitherto been a tendency to soft peddle what may be called ‘the Israeli side of the story’. While the situation of the Palestinians has generated wide-spread empathy for them and very rightly so, an understanding of the causes prompting the Israelis to think and act as they do has gone comparatively unaddressed. This is a glaring lacuna in Southern scholarship in particular on the Middle East question. But if the international community is to pave the way for even a measure of reconciliation in the region the points of view of both sides to the conflict need to be more thoroughly understood.

A news report on page 3 of this newspaper on December 12, 2025 titled, ‘ Israel is moving Lost Tribe Jews from India’, is compulsory reading for those seeking to understand the history of Israel in its essentials. Going by Biblical History in particular the stark truth is that the Israelis were as persecuted as the Palestinians. It could be said that this process began in ancient times even before the birth of Jesus Christ a little over 2000 years ago.

The Old Testament of the Bible is essential reading for an understanding of the history of the Israelis, who are also referred to as ‘The Chosen People of God’. It is a history replete with persecution, mind-numbing war and suffering. The Israelis were continually harassed, subjected to extreme suffering and were displaced from the land they were settled in; which roughly corresponds to today’s Palestinian territories.

The Books of the Old Testament tell us that right through ancient times the Jews, today’s Israelis, suffered displacement, particularly at the hands of the then regional powers, Egypt, Persia and Assyria, and were taken captive to the lands of the conquerors or were reduced to slavery in their own territories. Consequently, displaced Jews escaped to the most distant parts of the world. This is how they happened to be in India as well. However, the fact to note is that the Jews were at one time a settled community with territories of their own.

What is exemplary about the Israeli or Zionist state that was established in 1948, under the overlordship of the old imperial powers, such as Britain, is that it invited the Jews spread virtually all over the world to return to their homeland, the Zionist state. Accordingly, as the report of December 12 reveals, the remnants of the Jewish tribes in India, for example, numbering some 5,800 persons, are being taken back to Israel from India’s Mizoram and Manipur states. Also of note is the fact that the Jews were originally members of 12 tribes, which figure thought-provokingly corresponds to Jesus’ 12 apostles.

According to the news report, these repatriation moves by the Israeli state are not bereft of some strategic motives, such as the strengthening of the Israeli presence in areas bordering Lebanon, for example, which are seen as vulnerable to Hizbollah attacks. The repatriation moves are also interpreted as part of efforts to ‘Judaize’ the Galilean region in particular with a view to reducing the Arab-Islamic presence there, since these areas are also home to a considerable number of Arabs. Since the possibility of friction between the Israeli settlers from India and the Arabs cannot be ruled out, we could very well be seeing the prelude to stepped-up ethnic cleansing exercises by the Israeli state in these security-sensitive border areas.

The larger problem for the international community, given this backdrop, is ‘ where we could go from here’ with regard to making forward moves towards realizing even a measure of peace and reconciliation in the Middle East. The Israeli state is doing well to open its doors to the returning Jewish diaspora readily but given the current power configurations in Israel, transitioning to Middle East peace could remain a distant prospect.

To ascertain why peace remains elusive in the region one would need to factor in that the Netanyahu regime in Israel is of a Far Right orientation. Such regimes usually keep countries internally divided and virtually at war with themselves by exploiting to their advantage, among other things, identity issues. The settlement of persons hailing from ‘Lost Israeli Tribes’ in security-sensitive regions offers the Netanyahu regime the latest opportunity to pit one community against the other in these regions and thereby consolidate its influence and power over the Jewish majority in Israel.

Ethnic-cleansing exercises orchestrated by the Israeli centre take this process to a ‘new high’ and are based on the same destructive reasoning. Basically, the underlying logic is that the Jewish nation is under constant attack by its rivals and should be on a constant war footing with the latter.

Unfortunately the US is at present not doing anything constructive or concrete to further the cause of a fair Middle East peace. Its peace effort in the region has, to all intents and purpose, run aground; presuming that the US was, indeed, intent on pursuing a Middle East settlement. Nor is the US bringing pressure to bear on Israel to make some headway towards some sort of solution. In the absence of these essential factors the Middle East is bound to remain in a state of war.

While it ought to be granted that the Jews have a long history of persecution and victimization, the Israeli state is not doing its citizens any good by keeping these harrowing memories alive for the purpose of power-aggrandizement and by following a policy of pitting one community against the other. While the Jewish legacy of victimhood needs to be abandoned, the Jewish people would be doing themselves immense good by guarding against voting into office Right wing governments that thrive on the ruthless exploitation of identity issues.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.