Dr. Rohitha Silva appointed new FCCISL President

FCCISL past Presidents Ruwan Edirsinghe and Shirley Jayawardena handing over the presidential scroll to Dr. Rohitha Silva

Dr. Rohitha Silva has been appointed President of the Federation of Chambers of Commerce and Industry of Sri Lanka.

Dr. Silva was nominated by the Chamber of Lankan Entrepreneurs (COYLE) and becomes the first member of COYLE to assume the presidency of FCCISL since COYLE’s incorporation in 1999.

Commenting on the appointment, COYLE Chairman Suren Chandraratna said, “Dr. Rohitha Silva’s appointment to lead FCCISL is a proud moment not only for COYLE, but for the wider entrepreneurial community in Sri Lanka. His journey reflects the values we stand for as a chamber in resilience, innovation, practical leadership and a strong commitment to national development. At a time when businesses continue to navigate economic uncertainty, we believe his experience and steady leadership will help strengthen the voice of entrepreneurs and drive meaningful private-sector collaboration.”

Founded to champion entrepreneurship and enterprise development in Sri Lanka, COYLE has grown into one of the country’s most dynamic private-sector organisations, bringing together a new generation of Lankan entrepreneurs across diverse industries. The Chamber actively supports business growth, policy advocacy, innovation, knowledge-sharing and international networking opportunities while creating a strong platform for entrepreneurs to contribute to national economic development.

With more than 35 years of business experience, Dr. Silva brings practical leadership, strong private-sector insight and international exposure to the Federation. He is Chairman of idac (Pvt) Ltd., a company providing total solutions for air conditioning and ventilation.

Dr. Silva has served FCCISL in several key roles, including Board Member, Director, Vice President and Strategy Committee Chairman, contributing towards strengthening the chamber movement, supporting entrepreneurship and improving business representation nationally and regionally.His experience also extends to regional and international business platforms. He currently serves as Vice President of the SAARC Chamber of Commerce and Industry and is a past Chairman of COYLE.

Speaking on his appointment, Dr. Rohitha Silva said, “Sri Lanka’s entrepreneurs and SMEs remain the backbone of the economy despite recent challenges. My focus at FCCISL will be to strengthen business confidence, support regional enterprise development, encourage innovation and create stronger opportunities for businesses to grow locally and internationally.”