MoU signed for technology to prevent wild elephant-train collisions

Colombo, Sep. 2 (Daily Mirror) - A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed yesterday (September 1) to introduce a technological system aimed at preventing wild elephants from being killed in train collisions.

The MoU was signed at the President’s Media Centre under the patronage of Secretary to the President Dr. Nandika Sanath Kumanayake.

The project is being implemented under the “Clean Sri Lanka” programme as a public-private partnership involving the Railway Department, Department of Wildlife Conservation and Forest Conservation Department, with full financial support from People’s Bank.

The technology uses three-beam detection, passive infrared (PIR) sensors, automatic temperature sensors and a tamper alarm system to detect animals weighing more than 20 kilogrammes and identify unauthorised interference.

Signal lights in red, yellow and green installed on both sides of railway tracks, together with a special screen inside the locomotive cabin, will alert train drivers in advance to the location of an elephant.

A demonstration of the system was successfully conducted at the Pinnawala Elephant Orphanage in the presence of relevant officials, following which a report on the system was prepared.

The system is scheduled to be introduced as a pilot project from next month at 13 locations where wild elephant-train collisions are frequently reported.

A newly developed website, “slps.lk,” is also expected to be launched to allow the public and officials to monitor the progress of the project in real time.

Additional General Manager of Railways P.D.S.B. Chandrasena, Director General of Wildlife Conservation M.S.L.R.P. Marasinghe, Conservator General of Forests S.C. Palamakuumbura and People’s Bank Chairman Chandana Guniyangoda signed the MoU.

Officials from the Clean Sri Lanka Secretariat, including Presidential Additional Secretary (Clean Sri Lanka) Engineer S.P.C. Sugeeshwara, along with senior officials from the Railway Department, Department of Wildlife Conservation, Forest Conservation Department and People’s Bank, were also present.