Colombo Tea Auction firms on better grades, poorer teas stay sluggish

The total auction offerings comprised of 5.3 million kilogrammes (M/Kgs), marginally down from the 5.4 M/Kgs on offer the previous week.

Overall, a firm to dearer trend in the prices for the better teas was seen. The others were irregular, whilst the poorest continued to be sluggish.

The Ex-Estate offerings comprised of 0.77 M/Kgs, down from 0.83 M/Kgs on offer the previous week.

The Select Western BOP/BOPFs gained by Rs.50 per kilogramme, whilst the others were irregular and easier.

In the Below Best category, the select BOP invoices were Rs.20-40 per kilogramme dearer, whilst the others were lower by a similar margin. The corresponding BOPFs – select improved invoices, gained by Rs.20 per kilogramme, whilst the others declined by a similar margin.

At the lower end of the market, the prices for BOPs eased by up to Rs.50 per kilogramme, whilst the corresponding BOPFs continued to sell around last levels.

The Nuwara Eliya BOP/BOPFs – no offerings were available. The Uda Pussellawa BOP/BOPFs were mostly unsold, following poor quality.

The Uva BOPs – select coloury invoices, were firm and tended dearer, whilst the others were barely steady. The corresponding BOPFs – select invoices, gained by Rs.50 per kilogramme and more, whilst the others sold around last.

The High and Mid Grown CTC teas – BP1s, had hardly any offerings. The PF1s – a wider selection of better teas, appreciated by Rs.20 per kilogramme on average, whilst the others sold around last, following quality. The corresponding Low Grown types continued to sell well around last week’s price levels.

The lack of availability of better teas continued to weigh on the tea prices and also resulting in limited interest from the quality-conscious markets.

Less activity was seen from the shippers to the UK and continent. Fair interest was seen from Japan, China, the CIS and Middle East, whilst South Africa appeared inactive.

The Low Growns totalled approximately 2.2 M/Kgs. All categories met with fair demand. In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues – the BOP1s, OPs and PEKs in general, were firm, whilst the OP1s were firm to dearer.

The Select Best and Best OPAs were easier, whilst the Below Best and cleaner teas at the bottom appreciated, following quality. The PEK1s, in general, gained.

In the Tippy catalogue, a few Select Best FBOPs sold around last levels, whilst the balance together with the Best varieties was easier.

The bolder varieties were dearer, whilst the teas at the bottom were firm.

The Select Best FF1s were firm, whilst the Best varieties were easier. The Below Best and teas at the bottom appreciated.

In the Premium catalogue, the Tippy teas in general were dearer.