Sri Lanka’s 2026 economic growth predicted to be around 4-5 percent

Sri Lanka’s economic growth for 2026 will be around 4-5 percent, Central Bank Governor Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe said.

The Governor indicated the estimated economic growth while announcing the Central Bank’s policy agenda for this year, last Thursday.

‘The Central Bank’s 2026 growth estimation is higher than the growth prediction of the IMF and the World Bank and is achievable, the Governor told the media while announcing the Central Bank’s policy agenda for 2026.

Dr. Weerasinghe added: ‘The Central Bank will introduce a benchmark intra-day reference exchange rate this year to ensure transparency in the foreign exchange market.

‘The absence of a reference exchange rate has held back the expansion of the Sri Lankan forex market and discouraged the trading of rupee-denominated derivatives Governor said.

‘The Central Bank last year carried out the necessary preliminary work to implement the benchmark spot exchange rate.

‘The benchmark intra-day reference exchange rate will be introduced in 2026 to foster a transparent foreign exchange market.

‘This benchmark will guide market participants, help reduce volatility and promote more competitive pricing on a given date, thereby enabling the introduction of more innovative products in the foreign exchange market.

‘Sri Lanka’s foreign exchange market has limited derivatives like currency swaps and options aiming to deepen markets and attract inflows.

‘However, these instruments failed after a lack of reliable reference exchange rate amid concerns over excessive speculation, rupee over-appreciation risks and interventions distorting clean floating rates.’

Meanwhile, currency dealers welcomed the move and said it will help to deepen the market.

“This will expand the market with more products and promote rupee-denominated derivatives, a currency dealer from a local bank said.

“It is something the market wanted to fix in derivative prices. This is a pricing mechanism for the rupee, he added.

Dialog and UnionPay International Join Forces to Elevate Sri Lanka’s Digital Payment Landscape

Sevalanka Foundation and The Coca-Cola Foundation support flood-affected communities in Biyagama, Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.