Sri Lanka highlighted as a popular tourism hotspot among South Korean travelers

Sri Lanka Tourism, in collaboration with the Embassy of Sri Lanka to the Republic of Korea, is providing support for the two VVIP South Korean Buddhist delegations visiting the country, demonstrating solidarity and strengthening cultural and religious ties with Sri Lanka.

The first delegation included Anunayake thero of Jogye order , South Korean chief Buddhist monks and devotees arrived in Sri Lanka consisting of 120 , on 01st December 2025, with the intention of undertaking a pilgrimage tour and highlighting Sri Lanka’s importance as a major Buddhist attraction for Buddhists around the world.

As same as the first delegation, the second VVIP Buddhist delegation which arrived on the 10th of December, 2025, was also given warm and a colorful welcome at the Bandaranaike International Airport, complete with a Cultural Dance troupe and a group of Sri Lankan children to greet them upon their arrival, making them feel at home and happy to see such a sensational sight. Ms . Thanuja Muniweera , Deputy Director and also the officer in charge of the Korean Market , was there to welcome the much revered guests . The delegation consisted of 150 visitors including both priests and devotees.

Led by Ven . Hyeil, , Chief priest of Haeinsa Temple , the main purpose of this visit is to show Sri Lanka as a welcoming and culturally vibrant destination. This will be a great opportunity to show the importance of the Korean Market as an emerging market and also promote Buddhist and Pilgrimage Tourism. South Koreans are known to be travelling in large numbers, including December 2025. The South Korean Buddhist delegation is one such example.

Sri Lanka’s apparel sector records 5.42% growth for January-November 2025: November slight dip

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.