DHL Express celebrates 45 years of leadership

DHL Express is marking its 45 years of operations in Sri Lanka, connecting local businesses and communities to global opportunities through its logistics network.

Ken Lee, CEO, Asia Pacific, DHL Express, said, “For 45 years, DHL Sri Lanka has been connecting businesses and communities with the world, driving trade, growth, and opportunity. The anniversary is a celebration of the dedication of our people, customers’ trust, and the strength of DHL’s global network. Our purpose of ‘Connecting people, improving lives’ will continue to ensure we enable our employees and customers to thrive. Into the next decade, DHL is committed to investing in Sri Lanka’s future and delivering excellence.”

Dimithri Perera, Country Manager, DHL Express Sri Lanka said, “For more than four decades, we have remained committed to supporting Sri Lanka’s progress. The journey demonstrates resilience, innovation, and a deep commitment to our customers, employees, and local communities, to create lasting social impact. As we look to the future, we are focused on driving sustainable growth, empowering small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and connecting Sri Lanka to the world.”

DHL Express was established in Sri Lanka in 1980 as the country’s first international logistics provider. It became part of a joint venture partnership with the John Keells Holdings in 1992. The company has remained committed to supporting Sri Lanka’s economic growth, facilitating international trade, and empowering businesses – small and large – across various sectors, including apparel and e-commerce.

In 2007, DHL launched its office complex, followed by a gateway facility at Bandaranaike International Airport in 2008, streamlining international shipments and boosting operational efficiency. Customers benefited from Sri Lanka’s pioneering dedicated bonded warehouse, offering 24-hour customs clearance and support, enabling next-day delivery to selected international markets.

The past decade has witnessed significant achievements that have strengthened DHL’s market leadership. Over the years, the launch of the Digital Live Advisor in 2021 enhanced customer experience through advanced digital touchpoints. In 2022, DHL Express Sri Lanka introduced a dedicated customs clearance landing page, streamlining import-export processes for customers.

Seylan Bank continues SME sector regional engagement forums in North Central Region

GRI’s ULTIMATE GREEN XT earns another major Sustainability Award at Automechanika Dubai

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.