Australia and Sri Lanka strengthen partnership on electoral integrity

Australia and Sri Lanka have taken another step forward in their longstanding partnership, with the Australian Electoral Commission and the Election Commission of Sri Lanka signing a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) in Colombo on 2 September.

Strong, trusted election systems are fundamental to vibrant and well-functioning democracies. They ensure democratic institutions reflect their communities, respond to the needs of their people, and maintain public confidence.

As Indian Ocean neighbours and two of the region’s most vibrant democracies, Australia and Sri Lanka are natural partners. Both countries share a commitment to credible electoral processes, strong public institutions, and democratic governance.

The MoU will deepen practical cooperation between the two electoral commissions, creating opportunities to share expertise, exchange experience, and learn from each other on election management and administration.

Australian High Commissioner to Sri Lanka Matthew Duckworth said: “Strong election systems are the bedrock of our democracies. They give citizens confidence that their voices count, that their governments reflect the community’s aspirations and that their institutions serve them. As Indian Ocean neighbours and two of the region’s most vibrant democracies, Australia and Sri Lanka are natural partners. This agreement brings together two respected electoral institutions to share expertise, learn from each other and strengthen the systems that underpin our democracies. As Australia and Sri Lanka approach 80 years of partnership, this is another practical example of our countries working together to build strong institutions and deliver for our people.”

The signing was attended by Australian High Commissioner Duckworth, Australian Electoral Commission Acting Assistant Commissioner Melinda Vernon, Director – International Engagement Joanne Ridolfi, Election Commission of Sri Lanka Chairman R.M.A.L. Ratnayake, members of the Commission, General of Elections Commissioner Rasika Peiris, and senior officials from both organisations.