Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation General Limited strengthens No. 1 position

Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation General Limited (SLICGL) has achieved a historic milestone, becoming the first General Insurance (GI) company in Sri Lanka to surpass LKR 30 billion in Gross Written Premium (GWP). The landmark achievement sets a new benchmark for the industry and demonstrates SLICGL’s unmatched strength, credibility, and customer trust.

In addition to this record-breaking performance, SLICGL has strengthened its No. 1 position in Sri Lanka’s General Insurance market for 2025, continuing leadership from 2024. Posting outstanding financial metrics for 2025, the company has widened its lead over competitors, reinforcing dominance in the sector.

SLICGL also is the undisputed leader in motor insurance, a segment which continues to drive GI penetration nationwide. As the National Insurer, SLICGL carries the responsibility of safeguarding the nation, offering protection and peace of mind to individuals, families, and businesses.

The commitment covers a comprehensive portfolio of products including motor and personal accident cover, home protection, travel insurance, and medical emergency solutions delivering a calm assurance of providing affordable and accessible insurance for every Sri Lankan.

Through its flagship Suraksha programme and partnerships with government institutions, SLICGL continues to expand coverage to underserved communities, strengthening the role as the nation’s insurer of choice

Moreover, SLICGL holds the distinction of being Sri Lanka’s highest-rated insurance brand as the only A+ Fitch rated insurer in the country. SLICL was also recognised as the Most Valuable General Insurance Brand by Brand Finance.

Q4 earnings of companies expected to be reasonably good; retail investors returning to CSE

British Council launches new position paper calling for language-responsive education systems

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.