30th Annual General Meeting of Sri Lanka–Korea Business Council of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce

From left (seated): SLKBC Adviser Priyantha Mendis, Embassy of the Republic of Korea to Sri Lanka Research officer Minwoo Jo, Ambassador of the Republic of Korea to Sri Lanka Miyon Lee, SLKBC President Shamil Mendis, SLKBC Senior Vice President Patali Karunarathne, SLKBC Immediate Past President Asitha Martis, The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce Yashodha Fernando; (standing): JGK Holdings Kaveeshi Weliwattha, SLKBC Honorary Member John Shiran Dissanayake; BOV Capital Prajeeth Balasubramaniam; SLKBC Honorary Member Mahen Kariyawasan, Abans Emudu Perera; A. Baur & Co. Devapriya Arthanayake

The Sri Lanka–Korea Business Council (SLKBC) of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce held its 30th Annual General Meeting with Ambassador of the Republic of Korea to Sri Lanka Miyon Lee gracing the event as Chief Guest.

Ambassador Lee highlighted South Korea’s robust economic outlook under President Lee Jae-myung’s administration, which has embarked on a new five-year economic development plan. She noted that the successful hosting of the APEC Leaders’ Meeting emphasised Korea’s role in supporting global economic dialogue and easing geopolitical tensions.

Reflecting on the global economic environment, the Ambassador shared that despite lingering uncertainties, international growth forecasts continue to improve. She emphasised Korea’s strong fundamentals—low unemployment, stable inflation, and resilient consumer and business sentiment—driving expected GDP growth recovery in 2026. Korea’s leadership in advanced manufacturing sectors such as semiconductors, shipbuilding, defence, and cultural industries was underscored as key contributors to sustained growth.

The Ambassador also noted the potential to deepen economic cooperation with Sri Lanka, calling on Sri Lankan authorities and the business community to enhance the trade and investment climate through improved customs processes and regulatory efficiency. She cited growing opportunities in automobiles, cosmetics, food products tied to K-culture, port development, mineral resources, digital and AI-driven sectors.

Spear International Ltd., Shamil Mendis was elected President of the Council for 2025/2026. Mendis reaffirmed the Council’s mission to advance trade, investment, tourism, and business collaboration between Sri Lanka and Korea.

He highlighted key initiatives undertaken during the year; including a session on “Korea’s current economy, business environment and opportunities for joint collaborations,” a networking evening involving the members, government officials and representatives from the Embassy, and a collaborative event with the Council for start-ups on navigating the Korean market and opportunities for Sri Lankan businesses. The Council also hosted a highly acclaimed session on ‘Sri Lanka’s Future Forecast Scenarios and Challenges’ featuring leading Sri Lankan Economists, as well as a discussion on “Sri Lanka’s Export Prospect? Challenges. Opportunities. Reforms” led by an industry expert to explore strategies for expanding Sri Lanka’s global export footprint, particularly in sectors with untapped potential. Furthermore, a visit to Port City Colombo was arranged to explore investment avenues for Korean enterprises.

Mendis expressed appreciation to the Embassy of the Republic of Korea, the Embassy of Sri Lanka in Korea, KOTRA, KOIMA, KBA, and the Council’s membership for their continuous support. He reiterated the Council’s commitment to serving as a gateway for meaningful partnership with Korea as Sri Lanka enters a phase of economic reform and renewed global engagement.

President: Shamil Mendis – Spear International Ltd., Senior Vice President: Patali Karunarathne – Centrum Marine Consultancy Ltd., Vice President: Andre Fernando – MAC Holdings Ltd., Immediate Past President: Asitha Martis – Aitken Spence Shipping Ltd.

Committee Members: Representatives from Abans PLC, A. Baur & Company, BOV Capital Ltd., Isuru Engineering Ltd., JGK Holdings Ltd.

Advisory Committee: Priyantha Mendis – Past President, Honorary Members: Prof. Lakshman Watawala, Mahen Kariyawasan and John Shiran Dissanayake.