’It was a rebirth for all of us’: Passengers recall chaos after Air India flight hits turbulence

Times of India - An Air India flight from Phuket to Delhi encountered severe turbulence on Tuesday morning, briefly losing around 300 feet in altitude and leaving at least 17 people injured, including four cabin crew members.

Flight AI2379, operated by an Airbus A320 aircraft, landed safely at Indira Gandhi International Airport around 11.30am.

The aircraft had 134 passengers and eight crew members on board, news agency PTI reported.

The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has launched a probe into the incident.

A passenger onboard the flight described the turbulence as an extremely frightening experience, saying his father was thrown into the air and hit the aircraft’s roof, while his mother, wife and two-year-old daughter also suffered injuries.

“My father was sitting on the aisle seat and was having coffee. He was not wearing a seat belt as there was no mandatory light for it. Suddenly, a big jolt happened, and he flew and hit the roof and fell on the floor,” the passenger said.

He said his mother suffered swelling after hitting her head against the overhead cabin, while a part of the overhead compartment also struck her near the left eye, news agency ANI reported.

His wife and two-year-old daughter were also thrown into the aisle during the turbulence.

The child suffered a head injury and swelling and was treated at the airport.

The family was later discharged after doctors assessed their injuries as minor and travelled to Chandigarh by road.

“I would say that it was a rebirth for all of us. There were screams and my elder daughter, who is five years old, was so scared, as were we all,” he said.

The passenger also praised the pilot and cabin crew for helping passengers remain calm and called for a thorough inquiry into the incident.

Viviana, another passenger from Italy and daughter of the injured passenger, who was being moved into an ambulance, said, "The aircraft seemed to be moving normally, but suddenly the turbulence began. I saw my sister being thrown into the air from her seat. My mother was hit on the head. My phone fell away.”

“People sitting behind me also suffered injuries. A male passenger had blood on his face. We thought we would die. It was really scary. I was shaking and crying. It was horrible. I cannot hear properly right now," she added.

Seven passengers from the flight were admitted to Fortis Hospital in Vasant Kunj for medical evaluation and treatment, the hospital said.

The passengers were brought to the emergency department after the hospital received an alert from Air India regarding the turbulence incident.

A Code Yellow was subsequently activated to coordinate the medical response and deploy necessary resources, PTI reported.

The passengers underwent radiological investigations, including CT scans, MRIs and X-rays, where clinically required.

They were then shifted to inpatient rooms for further observation and treatment.

Fortis said doctors were continuing to assess the passengers and that the extent of their injuries and further treatment would become clearer after the investigations and specialist assessments.

Air India said the aircraft experienced a “brief in-flight turbulence-related event” during the cruise, resulting in a momentary change in altitude.

The airline said the aircraft landed safely in Delhi and all passengers and crew members disembarked.

“There has been no report of serious injuries. A small number of passengers and crew members with minor injuries requiring medical assessment have been taken to a medical facility at the airport for precautionary examination and care by Air India’s airport team and medical personnel,” the airline said.

Air India added that it was providing all necessary support to those affected and cooperating with the authorities investigating the incident.

The DGCA is also examining the circumstances surrounding the sudden altitude loss and injuries sustained during the flight.