Provincial politics, DUNF, Thondaman and conversations with Colvin

I was lucky enough to be elected on my very first foray into politics. Lalith and Gamini had offered me a position in the DUNF national list in the forthcoming general election but I was determined to enter politics by public acclamation. It was not a difficult decision because having served in Kandy district as a senior government official I was confident of winning both local government and national elections. I was proved right because I was returned in every election contested by me for 27 years consecutively. After I decided to retire undefeated, my nephew Dilum who assisted me in my election campaigns, succeeded me and has been returned on top of the list of winners in the Kandy district. His aggregate score of 171,000 votes in the 2019 election has not been bettered.

The second Provincial Council of the Central Province had a star studded cast which many compared favourably to the calibre of representatives in Parliament. Of the opposition group Gamini was the outstanding national figure though the SLFP leader Wijaya Wickremaratne was elected the leader of the Opposition in the council. “Pol Wikka”, my friend from Peradeniya University days, was a distinguished criminal lawyer in the country and we got on together like a house on fire. We trusted each other, without reservation and our DUNF group, though smaller in numbers, was well regarded by the Wickka led SLFP councillors.

He had the able assistance of another Peradeniya University colleague and leading lawyer Lal Wijenayake. All three of us Wikka, Lal and I had been earlier associated with the LSSP. This made it easy for us to adopt radical positions and thereby embarrass the UNP Chief Minister who was steeped in corruption and incompetence. We jointly planned to bring a vote of no confidence in him.

As expected our council had a fair number of members drawn from the estate Tamil community representing the workers of the “estate raj “in Kandy, Matale and Nuwara Eliya districts. Many of them like Putrasigamani, Sathasivam and Chandrasekeran later entered Parliament. The most interesting of these representatives was Chandrasekeran who broke away from Thondaman and formed his own party. Chandrasekeran’s party was growing in strength. He entered Parliament and became an important MP ensuring CBKs survival. He was made a Deputy Minister. However once in Colombo he began drinking heavily and died of cirrhosis of the liver at a young age.

He was the only leader with a mass following and the potential to challenge the Thondaman dynasty. The DUNF also had Monty Gopallawa and Keheliya Rambukwella who both later became senior ministers in national administrations. Among the UNP winners were Lucky Jayawardene and Sarath Kongahage who later entered Parliament. Mahindananda Aluthgamage entered politics as a SUP member in the CPC representing Nawalapitiya.

The vote of no confidence in the Chief Minister was not only a test of strength. On its success or failure the DUNF would have to assess its future strategy. In the event, the combined force of SLFP-DUNF and a fewTamil representatives could not overturn the UNP juggernaut. Ranil, Cooray and Choksy intervened forcefully to whip the UNP councillors into line and we suffered a heavy defeat. Partly because of this Gamini, now left with the burden of leading the party alone, began to rethink his strategy in the new circumstances of the absence of Premadasa and Lalith and the need of the UNP to have a charismatic leader of the front rank emerging from the JRJ era.

Gamini, Wickrema Weerasooria and I had many discussions regarding the DUNF and its future operations. At the same time Gamini talked to Premachandra, Monty Gopallawa and other DUNF leaders about his dilemma. Clearly an important decision had to be taken regarding the future of the DUNF.

The Central Provincial Council was a good introduction to the realities of Sri Lankan politics. Of all the Provincial Councils, save perhaps the Western Provincial Council, it was the CPC which had a range of our national ethnic minorities represented within it. This was mostly because Nuwara Eliya district, which was one of the three districts represented in the CPC, had a large number of voters from the group previously known as Indian Tamils or estate Tamils. Similarly there were significant numbers of Muslims in the three districts, many of them domiciled from the time of Sinhala kings and referred to as Kandyan Muslims with Sinhala “Ge”names.

There were also many urban Tamils from the group known as Ceylon Tamils who were mainly engaged in business. Ceylon Tamils were also well represented in the professions in the Central Province. The Sinhalese though constituting the majority of the voters were also ranged in terms of upcountry Sinhala and low country Sinhala, with the latter having a disproportionate influence due to their economic dominance. Many of them were powerful behind the scenes and tended to support their favourites belonging to other communities.

Furthermore the Sinhalese and Tamils were subdivided on the basis of caste. Among the Sinhala the caste issue had raised its head as never before since the larger number of members represented in the Provincial Council, as distinct from Parliament, had opened up opportunities for the marginalized Kandyan castes to rally round and elect their own caste members. In fact a tally of the successful provincial councilors of the CPC resembled a “Who’s Who” of the Kandyan caste system. They tended to look on their power to render services through the CPC as a means of cementing their caste base.

One of the results of the introduction of Provincial Councils has been the exacerbation of communal and caste divisions which have thereafter influenced the election of members to Parliament as well. This is one of the reasons identified by commentators as to why the quality of MPs has steadily declined since the beginning of Provincial Councils.

On the positive side the CPC has enabled estate workers to find some type of representation. It will be recalled that this played a significant role in the first Parliamentary election group [1947]. At this time they enjoyed the franchise and returned a large number of members of the Tamil community as MPs. Virtually all the seats in the estate areas of Central and Uva provinces were won by the Ceylon Workers Congress, which was led by Savumiamoorthy Thondaman – a consummate politician and tactician. In fact it was the LSSP and the CP [N. Sanmugathasan’s Red Flag Organization] which first organized militant workers unions because they recognized estate workers as the nearest approximation to a “proletariat” in the country.

I remember discussing this issue with Colvin R de Silva late in his life. He had been a pioneer in organizing the estate workers which led to their “uprising” in Mooloya estate. The workers led by the LSSP had taken planters hostage and boycotted work for weeks. However the Planter Raj and the colonial administration had struck back. The Police fired on the strikers killing their leader Govindan and terrorizing them to get back to work.

In the court case launched by the Police, Colvin appeared for the militant workers and saved them. Inspite of that Colvin told me that with the disenfranchisement of the estate Tamils and the emergence of Thondaman as the saviour of their ethnic group, the LSSP was pushed out of contention in the estate sector. This was clearly seen in that the local LSSP leader Jack Kotelawela, who entered Parliament in 1947 as the LSSP MP for Badulla, was compelled to change colours and join the SLFP in order to stand a chance of winning in subsequent elections.

According to Colvin he and NM had to scour the estates to locate their former Tamil comrades who had by that time joined Thondaman on communal grounds. Some of them had disappeared with the party subscriptions collected from their workers. They ended up by failing in their search and giving up on what at one time seemed the most promising of their organizational targets. Since then they had no real working class base in terms of Karl Marx’s criteria. Instead they were compelled to follow the Parliamentary path which ended up in coalition politics and oblivion.

Colvin knew the nuts and bolts of planting as he was an owner of tea and coconut plantations. Clad in a tee shirt and blue shorts he enjoyed relaxing in his tea plantation in Uduwela, a few miles from Hantana in Kandy. I had the good fortune to meet him there occasionally and enjoy his conversation and hospitality. He was a fabulous conversationalist and his reminiscences about politics and his legal victories held me spellbound. He and Bernard Soysa had a practical approach to the tea trade and was dismayed when Hector Kobbekaduwa insisted on a full take over of the management of estates which finally ended up with his and Sirimavo’s relatives looting a national asset. Kobbekaduwa was led up the garden path by his left wing officials like Mahinda Silva. Our economy is still suffering due to their gerrymandering. After doing untold damage, Hector and his ilk were swept out of office in 1977. He lost his seat in the Kandy district and was also defeated in the Presidential election.

The key man in Indian Tamil politics in both upcountry and nationwide was Thondaman, the leader of the Ceylon Workers Congress. After he linked up with JRJ in 1977 and accepted Cabinet office, the left and SLFP in their May Day rallies coined a slogan “Kavuda Man-Thondaman” thereby confirming his significant role in the political landscape of the day as the only leader with a well organized working class under his command. I had a cordial relationship with “Thonda” and was often invited for his celebrated “thosai” breakfasts at his home in a spacious apartment facing Royal College in Colombo 7.

Many Ambassadors and senior politicians vied to get those invitations as they knew that their host carried a clout as a confidante of all the Presidents irrespective of their political affiliations. President D. B. Wijetunga was his classmate at St. Andrews College Gampola. They had to walk miles to get to school and acquire an English education which stood them in good stead later in life. Thonda had a privileged childhood because he was the son of an estate leader and unofficial money lender to the workers. He had done well and was the owner of Wavendon estate in the hill country.

Thonda took to politics early in his career which he started as a “progressive” supporting the left and the SLFP. He was then an associate of TB Ilangaratne and was credited with the latter’s victory in Hewaheta electorate in 1956 by getting his workers to vote “en masse” for the SLFP candidate. Ilangaratne became a powerful minister under Bandaranaike and later Mrs. B.

A turning point in Thondaman’s career was his alliance with JRJ and the UNP which helped in the latters landslide victory of 1977. JRJ solved the problem of “stateless” Tamils who had neither been repatriated to India nor given citizenship here. These people and their natural issue were given Sri Lankan citizenship by JRJ much to the satisfaction of the CWC as well as India which did not want another festering citizenship issue on its doorstep. This resolution of a major problem also gave Thonda unparalleled access to the Indian government which often expressed its wishes through him to our government.

Unknown to many he was “the voice of reason” in Indo-Sri Lankan affairs which was of great comfort to our leaders. Right throughout the Northern conflict he kept the estate Tamils out of the war which prevented the opening of a “second front” against the Sri Lankan forces. The LTTE tried desperately to foster anti-Sinhala militancy in the hill country but failed mainly due to Thonda and the conciliatory politics of his CWC. Thereby he helped to avoid a racial conflagration in the heartland of Sri Lanka.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.