Hayleys sustains growth momentum, delivering Profit Before Tax of Rs. 13.33 bn in first half of 2025/26

The Hayleys Group sustained its strong growth trajectory during the first six months of the financial year ending 31st March 2026, generating a Profit Before Tax of Rs.13.33 bn, a 5% y-o-y increase compared to the corresponding period of the previous year. Consolidated Revenue grew by 13% to Rs.138.89 bn during the 2nd quarter, supported by commendable growth in domestic businesses, which was complemented by the Group’s resilient export businesses.

Hayleys continued to leverage its diverse geographic and industry coverage to capitalise on emerging opportunities and evolving dynamics in the operating landscape. The Group broadened its strategic footprint during the period with its entry into the mobility sector, supermarket sector and the acquisition of a substantial stake in Harischandra Mills PLC, a household FMCG brand, reputed for its deep consumer trust and longstanding market presence.

Domestic macroeconomic conditions continued to improve, underpinned by prudent monetary policy, sustained revenue growth and ongoing fiscal consolidation, creating a more enabling environment for business expansion. This robust domestic performance allowed the Group to remain resilient despite uncertain global dynamics which were shaped by elevated geopolitical risks and divergent policy positions. The Group’s strong footing at home provided an effective buffer against external headwinds, enabling it to navigate global volatility while maintaining stability in its core operations.

The Group’s Revenue grew by 14% to Rs.269.53 bn during the first six months of the year, driven primarily by the Consumer & Retail Sector, which leveraged its unparalleled geographical reach and brand strength to capitalise on favourable demand conditions. The Hand Protection and Purification Sectors also maintained growth momentum, enabling export-oriented Sectors to achieve a Revenue growth of 6% during the first six-months of the year. Meanwhile, the Group’s cumulative Consolidated Earnings Before Interest, Tax, Depreciation and Amortisation (EBITDA) and Earnings Before Interest and Tax (EBIT) increased by a respective 4% and 2% to Rs. 26.25 bn and Rs. 19.55 bn during the first six months of the financial year. The disciplined execution of the Group’s strategy- centred on value-added offerings, market diversification, and digital transformation of key processes, continued to yield tangible benefits, reinforcing core profitability.

Agreement signed for Port City Colombo’s first Commercial Office Development

SriLankan Airlines scores a Slam Dunk at the Annual MSBA League Tournament

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.