Bay of Bengal countries celebrate small-scale fisheries on World Fisheries Day

To mark World Fisheries Day 2025, Sri Lanka and countries bordering the Bay of Bengal came together to celebrate the contributions of small-scale fisheries to coastal livelihoods, food security, and sustainable development.

This year’s celebrations are especially significant as they coincide with FAO’s 80th anniversary, eight decades dedicated to support sustainable fisheries, food security, and coastal livelihoods worldwide. The event was organised by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) and the Bay of Bengal Program Inter-Governmental Organisation (BOBP-IGO), in collaboration with the Government of Sri Lanka. The celebration brought together representatives from Bangladesh, India, Maldives, and Sri Lanka, along with fisher organisations, partners, and local institutions, to strengthen regional cooperation in the fisheries sector.

“Sri Lanka is proud to host this event,” said Prime Minister of Sri Lanka Dr. Harini Amarasuriya. “More than 4.3 million Sri Lankans depend directly or indirectly on fisheries for their livelihoods, and our ocean, rivers and lakes. By working together with our partners, we are advancing shared goals for sustainability, resilience and prosperity, ensuring that our coastal communities can thrive for generations to come.”

Observed globally on 21 November, World Fisheries Day recognises the importance of sustainable fisheries for food security, livelihoods and economic growth. It calls attention to the need for responsible management of aquatic resources, better working conditions for fishers, and greater recognition of their role in local and global aquatic food systems.

This year, FAO and BOBP-IGO marked the day by showcasing how regional cooperation and local commitment are shaping a stronger, more sustainable small-scale fisheries sector across the Bay of Bengal.

A key focus of the event was the advancement of National Plans of Action for Small-Scale Fisheries (NPOA-SSF) – national strategies that guide countries in implementing the Voluntary Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-Scale Fisheries (SSF Guidelines). Representatives from the four Bay of Bengal countries shared experiences and reaffirmed their commitment to equitable, inclusive and sustainable fisheries governance.

“World Fisheries Day is an opportunity to celebrate the contribution of small-scale fishers and fish workers,” said BOBP-IGO Director Pandian Krishnan. “Through the NPOA-SSF process, our countries are translating the Voluntary Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-Scale Fisheries, a global commitment, into concrete action, strengthening governance, empowering fishing communities and ensuring long-term sustainability in the Bay of Bengal.”

In conjunction with World Fisheries Day, FAO and BOBP-IGO are also convening a Regional Inception Workshop on NPOA-SSF development from 20 to 22 November. The workshop will launch National Task Forces (NTFs) in each of the four member countries, providing capacity development, and outlining the next steps for strengthening small-scale fisheries management and cooperation across the region.

World Fisheries Day took place alongside “Aqua Planet” a national event organised by the Government of Sri Lanka from 21 to 23 November to promote awareness of national fisheries and seafood industries, highlighting sustainable practices in aquatic food production.

Together, these events reinforce the Bay of Bengal region’s commitment to sustainable, inclusive and climate-resilient fisheries, ensuring that small-scale fishers and fish workers continue to play a leading role in achieving Blue Transformation and a more sustainable and resilient future for all.

“World Fisheries Day reminds us that small-scale fisheries are vital to global food security, coastal livelihoods, and the health of our ocean,” said FAO Representative in Sri Lanka Vimlendra Sharan. “FAO works with countries to ensure that these communities, who produce nearly half of the world’s fish for human consumption, have the tools, knowledge and voice they need to thrive.”

The Bay of Bengal Program Inter-Governmental Organisation is a regional fisheries body that supports its members in enhancing livelihoods and the quality of life for small-scale fisherfolk.

It carries out a range of activities to achieve this. Recent examples have included a meeting in the Maldives in February to provide policy guidance on mainstreaming the Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries (EAF) in small-scale fisheries in the region and a workshop in September in Chennai, India, to build capacity on the NPOA-SSF development process.