Code of Ethics for capital market influencers in the pipeline

The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) of Sri Lanka is planning to introduce a Code of Ethics or a set of guidelines for the activities of capital market influencers to protect the public from ongoing scams involving the swindling money from potential investors in the share market.

“The market regulator has already identified Blue Ocean Securities Limited and Gladius South Asia as involved in such scams, which are being investigated by the relevant authorities, said Deputy Director General of the SEC Tushara Jayaratne.

The Deputy Director General also said that Gladius was using their their logo in a fraudulent manner to promote their business as well.

He said Blue Ocean has been involved in asking investors to start trading through an app named BOMate Nd. ‘Through this app, you can’t trade shares. But the money transaction goes through this app and the SEC system does not see these transactions, Jayaratne explained.

“The money is going somewhere else, Jayaratne told journalists at a media briefing yesterday held at the SEC auditorium, WTC building, Colombo.

Jayaratne said the SEC has already made complaints to both the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) of the police and the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) of the Central Bank.

The Deputy Director General said the second company, Gladius South Asia, has been involved in asking investors not to invest their money in the local stock market, but to do so in the markets in foreign countries.

He also said that the SEC has adopted 12 key capital market development projects to increase the number of capital market investors.

“The Introduction of a Code of Ethics and guidelines for registered investment advisers will help to develop the market in an efficient and effective way, he said.

Jayaratne, however, said that the Sri Lankan share market is not full of scams and that people can have confidence in the market.

“Our market is somewhat free and fair. From the perspective of investors, you also have a responsibility to be careful when investing in the market, he added.

South Asia’s first-ever Reggae Music Festival “ONE LOVE 2026” set to ignite Bentota

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.