Prof. G.L. Peiris Trust for Legal Education and Research launched

Colombo, Oct. 3 (Daily Mirror) - Former Minister Prof. G.L. Peiris, a leading legal academic who even served as the Vice Chancellor of Colombo University, has now established a trust that will finance legal research and finance

All the royalties of publications will be directly transferred to this fund. The Trust was launched at a function attended by Presidents’ counsel who were his students one time, politicians, professionals, academics and family members on October 1 at the Senate Hall of Colombo University.

Delivering remarks at the event, Prof. Peiris reflected on his long association with the University, particularly the Faculty of Law. He recalled the institution’s transformation from an elite, English-language institution into a much larger and more socially diverse university.

He recalled entering the Department of Law as a student when there were only 17 students, describing the rigorous academic standards that prevailed at the time. Legal education was conducted exclusively in English, and students faced demanding examinations, including papers requiring knowledge of Latin. He said entry into the Faculty of Law was regarded as a significant achievement.

Prof. Peiris then spoke about the transition towards legal education in the national languages. He recalled opposition to it, fearing that standards would decline because there was insufficient legal literature and teaching material in the national languages. However, the argument was made that changing the medium of instruction would itself create demand for books, research and legal literature in the national languages.

He described the subsequent mass expansion and democratisation of university education as a major transformation. As the number of university students increased, new social problems emerged, including accommodation difficulties faced by students from rural areas, particularly women. He recalled efforts to establish a women's hostel and praised those who helped raise funds for it.

Former Vice Chancellor of the University Savithri Gunasekera delivered the keynote address. Prof. Nishantha Sampath Punchihewa, the dean of the Law Faculty and Principal of the Law College Prasantha Lal De Alwis also spoke at the event. Prof. Peiris also made a private financial contribution to the Fund in addition to royalties for his publications. He has authored 10 books related to legal education. In addition, he has authored a book on Sri Lanka’s peace process with the LTTE. He was the chief negotiator for that government. The books on law are:

Some Aspects of the Law of Unjust Enrichment in South Africa & Ceylon