Sri Lanka’s New Chapter: A Shared Journey Of Recovery

After economic collapse, political turbulence and social hardship, Sri Lanka stands at a turning point. The country’s recovery will depend not only on economic reforms or political will, but on the ability of its people and leaders to work together toward a fairer, more resilient future.

Unlike past presidents, Anura Kumara Dissanayake (AKD) has drastically reduced state perks, residence costs, security staff, police escorts, and vehicle fleets for politicians—including himself. The savings from these reforms are estimated at around Rs. 1.1 billion annually. While largely symbolic, these reforms send a powerful message that public service must be grounded in accountability and restraint.

The current government is not perfect. Some of the Ministers lack experience and are learning on the job. However, does the current government deserve the support of citizens? AKD is providing responsible leadership and the government has begun work to tackle many profound national issues.

First, Drug trafficking. It is one of the most pressing problems confronting Sri Lanka today. In the absence of the emergence of a honest and courageous leader, Sri Lanka’s situation could have deteriorated rapidly to that seen in Afghanistan or Mexico —countries that are struggling to contain drug-related violence, organised crime, corruption, and social instability. Over the past seven decades, Sri Lanka witnessed the underworld strengthen due to political patronage. Several notorious narcotic kingpins even operated close to former presidents. The government has intensified efforts to disrupt narcotic networks and prosecute drug kingpins. The goal is not only to enforce the law but also to dismantle the deeper relationship between crime and politics that has long undermined public order. It is an extremely difficult and risky battle, but one essential for a peaceful and stable society.

Second, ADK is effectively managing the complex realities of ethnic diversity to promote national harmony for the first time since independence. Across the world countries such as Singapore, Switzerland, South Africa, and Canada have successfully managed ethnic and religious diversity of their populations. However, since independence, Sri Lanka’s political leaders have often exploited ethnic and religious differences—Sinhala, Tamil, Muslim, and Burgher; Buddhist, Christian, Hindu, and Muslim—to consolidate majority support. Incidents such as the “Sinhala Only Act” (1956), the burning of the Jaffna Public Library (1981), the anti-Tamil riots of “Black July” (1983), post-2009 victory narratives, and the Easter bombings (2019) illustrate the devastating consequences of this divisive politics.

The recent UN Human Rights Council resolution on Sri Lanka, adopted without a vote at its 60th session, fails to acknowledge the current leadership’s genuine commitment to reconciliation. While the resolution is politically insensitive, it can be used as an opportunity. Constructive engagement with international partners could help Sri Lanka to access technical and financial assistance to strengthen its reconciliation programmes and institutions.

Third, the independence of the judiciary and the professionalism of the police are fundamental to sustainability of any democracy. In recent years political interference in these institutions has severely eroded public trust. According to a 2024 public-perception survey by the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC), the police were ranked as the most vulnerable institution to bribery and corruption. The current government has pledged to protect the autonomy of the judiciary and the police force. The Chief Justice and senior judges now have greater freedom to pursue reforms and function independently. The police force under the new Inspector General of Police has introduced changes in recruitment, promotions, and transfers to ensure efficiency and accountability.

These reforms are still evolving, but they have already contributed to improved international rankings. In 2024, Sri Lanka rose to 75th place in the World Justice Project’s Rule of Law Index — a modest but encouraging sign. A strong and independent justice system is vital for stability, investment, and effective governance.

Fourth, corruption has been one of the most persistent barriers to progress in Sri Lanka. Over the years corruption networks have become deeply embedded in the society, involving politicians, government servants, those in law enforcement and public. In Transparency International’s 2024 Corruption Perceptions Index, Sri Lanka was ranked 121st out of 180 countries (where rank 1 indicates the least corrupt).

AKD’s administration is pursuing a multifaceted strategy to tackle bribery and corruption. It is combining legal reforms (including the Anti-Corruption Act No. 9 of 2023), asset-forfeiture legislation, institutional strengthening, and the National Anti-Corruption Action Plan 2025–2029, developed by CIABOC with UNDP support. The government is expanding CIABOC’s mandate and reinforcing the Auditor General’s oversight role.

Under the leadership of the Director General of CIABOC, the government has prioritised long-overdue investigations into elite corruption, including the bond scam and procurement irregularities of past regimes. For these reforms to take root, CIABOC, the Auditor General’s Department, and other oversight institutions need consistent funding and professional staff. International support from the World Bank and the UN Office on Drugs and Crime, through initiatives like the Stolen Asset Recovery (STAR) programme, can also strengthen Sri Lanka’s ability to trace and recover illicit assets.

Fourth, there are encouraging signs of economic recovery. According to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) , Sri Lanka—along with Iceland and Ghana—is among the few nations to achieve a rapid economic rebound following financial collapse. This progress has been possible only because AKD has prioritised peace, ethnic harmony, law enforcement, and good governance.

Government is leading structural and policy reforms under IMF guidance, including debt restructuring and fiscal discipline. Tourism and remittances have rebounded, and investor confidence is growing. In 2024, Sri Lanka’s economy grew by 5%, exceeding expectations. Inflation has remained below the Central Bank’s 5% target—far below the 69.8% peak recorded in September 2022.

However, many households remain under strain from higher taxes and prices. Poverty and inequality persist, with nearly 25% of the population pushed below the poverty line during the 2022 crisis. The 2025 budget allocated Rs. 749 billion for social protection programmes, including Aswesuma, Praja Shakthi, a 40% increase in the minimum wage, and expanded nutrition and school grant schemes. If these initiatives are implemented transparently using digital technology for targeting, the World Bank projects that poverty could decline to 19–22% by 2026.

The 2026 budget presents a cautiously growth-oriented plan, combining fiscal consolidation (with a deficit targeted around 5 % of GDP) and debt reduction alongside increased social welfare, digital transformation and infrastructure investment. Although AKD is steering Sri Lanka in the right direction, full recovery will take decades.

Finally, sustainable recovery also depends on freedom of expression and accountability — the freedom to speak and to hold leaders accountable. The current government is secure enough to tolerate criticism. Journalists, academics, and citizens are expressing their views with greater confidence.

We must not forget the atmosphere of fear that once silenced dissent. During the 2022 crisis, when the nation was in turmoil, it was with great apprehension that I published the book “Sri Lanka: Tears and Dreams of a Fragile Democracy”. Today, I have no fear in expressing my views—and, if necessary, I can be critical of AKD’s government in the future. This renewed openness is essential for a healthy democracy.

Sri Lanka’s journey toward sustainable economic, social, and environmental development will be long and arduous.  While some governance reforms are gradually taking root, progress is slow due to institutional inertia, resource constraints, bureaucratic inefficiency and pervasive corruption. In addition, the opposition continues to spread misinformation to mislead the public and grab power at any cost.

Nevertheless, AKD continues to demonstrate courage, dedication and conviction. His leadership is driving the nation towards stability and sustainable recovery. Recovery is not the responsibility of the president or the government alone. It is a national initiative. While the state leads with integrity and credibility, we the citizens have a sacred duty to respond with engagement, accountability and long-term commitment.

*The writer is a Specialist Physician, former Professor of Medicine, University of Peradeniya, and former Senior Adviser, World Health Organization Geneva.