Orchid Paradise unveiled to champion Sri Lanka’s endemic flora

Spa Ceylon, the world’s largest luxury Ayurveda chain, has once again merged beauty, heritage, and environmental consciousness—this time through the conservation of Sri Lanka’s rare and endemic orchids. At the launch of Orchid Paradise, a three-day immersive experience held at the Colombo City Centre (CCC) from November 7 to 9, 2025, the homegrown brand reaffirmed its deep commitment to sustainability and biodiversity.

The multi-sensory journey—an extension of Spa Ceylon’s 2025 limited-edition festive collection—pays homage to the captivating orchids that flourish deep within Sri Lanka’s lush rainforests. More than a visual spectacle, Orchid Paradise serves as a call to action to protect one of the island’s most delicate natural treasures.

“As a brand dedicated to sustainability and conscious well-being, Spa Ceylon continues to champion vital environmental causes in our island home, said Shalin Balasuriya, Co-Founder and Group Director of Spa Ceylon. “This year, we are contributing to the conservation of Sri Lanka’s rich orchid biodiversity, which faces increasing threats from various environmental challenges. Through Orchid Paradise, we aim to strengthen national capacity in scientific research, conservation management, and sustainable biodiversity practices, while also enhancing public awareness on the importance of native plant conservation.”

A percentage of proceeds from each purchase of the Orchid Paradise limited-edition collection will directly support the conservation and long-term protection of Sri Lanka’s native and endangered orchids in rainforest regions. The initiative builds upon Spa Ceylon’s growing portfolio of sustainability projects, which have previously included successful collaborations with conservation groups on butterflies, fruiting plants, and other endemic flora.

In conversation with The Island Financial Review, Balasuriya explained that Orchid Paradise reflects Spa Ceylon’s long-standing philosophy of merging luxury with purpose.

“The Orchid Paradise is a festive collection we are doing, and as always, we highlight something that is unique to Sri Lanka, he said. “This year we’ve highlighted our orchids—beautifully draped across the packaging—to take the message of conserving our endemic species. We’ve also created an immersive experience that educates and inspires people about the need to protect them.”

Balasuriya noted that while the exact figures on Sri Lanka’s orchids vary, available estimates suggest the island is home to about 200 species, with roughly a quarter being endemic. “The numbers are not always well-documented—like most figures in Sri Lanka—but we’re working closely with the Department of Botanical Gardens and local experts to verify data and identify areas where we can best help, he said.

Mahindra Ideal Finance records 204% growth in PBT to Rs. 477 mn for H1 FY26

Janashakthi Life soars Q3 with 249% surge in profits and 72% growth in New Business Premiums

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.