Tea auction sees sharp decline in premium Western teas

The auction offerings were marginally higher to the previous week and totalled 6.2 million kilogrammes (M/Kgs), of which 0.7 M/Kgs comprised of reprints and fresh tea offerings of 5.5 M/Kgs.

The Leafy/Semi-Leafy teas continued to sell well, notwithstanding the price fluctuations within the grades. The Orthodox/Rotovane teas and particularly the teas in the higher price bracket from the Western slopes were substantially easier and often unsold, due to the lack of suitable bids, partially due to the plainer quality.  The Ex-Estate offerings totalled 0.92 M/Kgs. The overall quality was relatively uninteresting, with a greater availability of the offerings comprising of the teas in the Below Best and Plainer categories.

The Westerns in the higher price bracket were sharply lower with many withdrawals, due to a lack of suitable bids. The teas in the Below Best and Plainer categories mostly sold around the previous week’s levels, with the price variances often reflective of the quality.

The Nuwara Eliyas continued to be sluggish. The Uva/Uda Pussellawas – Better teas, were firm and marginally easier, whilst the poorer sorts declined quite sharply.

The current pricing levels reflect a distinct advantage for the BOPF grade, which often realised a premium of Rs.100-150 per kilogramme plus vis-à-vis their corresponding BOP invoices.

The High and Medium Grown CTC teas mostly sold around last week’s levels, whilst the corresponding Low Grown types were firm and edged up marginally for selected invoices.

The shippers to the UK, continent and South Africa appeared to be very selective. Fair interest was seen from Japan, whilst perhaps there was less activity from China. Activity from the shippers to the CIS and Middle East were as usual, although often at lower levels.

The Low Growns totalled approximately 2.4 M/Kgs. Fair demand was witnessed in the Leafy, Semi-Leafy and Tippy categories, whilst the premium category met with less demand.

In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues, the BOP1s in general were dearer. The Select Best and Best OP1s were firm, whilst the balance was irregularly easier.

The OPs, in general were firm, whilst the OPAs declined. The high-priced PEKs maintained, whilst the balance together with the PEK1s was dearer.

In the Tippy catalogue, the FBOPs in general sold around last levels. The well-made FF1s were firm, whilst the Below Best were irregular, following quality. The balance sold at last levels.  In the Premium catalogue, the Tippy teas in general declined.