Minister vows to push ‘crucial’ CEB restructuring, ‘disregard any obstacles’

Energy Minister Kumara Jayakody has declared the restructuring of the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) to be ‘crucial’ for achieving the nation’s energy goals and confirmed he will ‘disregard any obstacles’ to its implementation. This defiant statement signals that the government is forging ahead with the contentious reforms, even as power sector trade unions engage in street protests against the move.

Speaking at the recent opening of a new 5-megawatt solar power project in Galle, the minister emphasised that the restructuring of the CEB is being carried forward with a specific purpose, underscoring its necessity as part of a national programme to embrace renewable energy.

” The government’s aggressive push to unbundle the monopolistic CEB into specialised generation, transmission, and distribution entities is happening in a backdrop of striking political hypocrisy.The current administration, when in Opposition, was a vocal and leading force against any form of CEB reform, routinely labeling previous attempts as a sell-out of national assets. Today, they are the driving force behind the same legislative changes, showing a dramatic U turn on power policy,” a trade union activist told the media.

However, Minister Jayakody has stated that the reforms were necessary for the greater national good, stressing that renewable energy projects are a ‘national necessity.’ He pledged that the government would proceed with ‘goodwill and openness,’ confirming that it is the administration’s policy to ensure the state ownership of the electricity sector is protected while safeguarding the rights of employees and trade unions.

Despite these assurances, powerful CEB trade unions view the restructuring moves as a precursor to privatisation in the near future.

LB Finance to raise Rs. 20 billion through debentures; selling pressure brings down indices

Xeptagon opens first climate finance technology office at the Business Centre at Port City Colombo

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.