S. Thomas’ College joins GEW 2025 to debut SL’s All-island Schools National Startup  Innovation Event to celebrate 175th anniversary

Top 25 shortlisted entries will showcase their innovative ideas on 2 Nov. at STC College Hall and will be open to public viewing from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m.

As part of its grand 175th anniversary celebrations, S. Thomas’ College (STC) has announced the launch of the first-ever All-Island Schools National Startup Innovation Event, scheduled to take place in partnership with Global Entrepreneurship Week (GEW) in November 2025. This pioneering initiative reflects STC’s commitment to elevating entrepreneurship across Sri Lanka by nurturing the next generation of innovators and leaders.

Founded in 1851, STC’s 175-year legacy is marked by a tradition of excellence in education and leadership development. The college’s Warden emphasises, “This milestone year inspires us to empower our youth with the skills and mindset to pioneer change through innovation and entrepreneurship. This innovation/startup event, in partnership with leading ecosystem players, is a testament to our dedication to holistic education and societal progress.”

Global Entrepreneurship Week, a flagship initiative of the Global Entrepreneurship Network, is celebrated worldwide each November to ignite inspiration, opportunity, and global connectivity for entrepreneurs. GEW offers a diverse range of events including workshops, pitching competitions, and networking that transform ideas into successful ventures.

As the principal partner of this landmark initiative, Sampath Bank stands alongside S. Thomas’ College in inspiring the next generation of Sri Lankan innovators. As a pioneer in financial innovation, the Bank continues to play a leading role in advancing the nation’s entrepreneurial landscape by empowering startups and SMEs through access to funding, mentorship, and strategic partnerships. Through its association with the All-Island Schools National Startup Innovation Event, Sampath Bank reaffirms its belief that entrepreneurship is a vital driver of sustainable economic growth and national development, further strengthening its commitment to building a culture of innovation across the country.

Joining the event’s powerful ecosystem is the Lankan Angel Network. Established in 2012, the network has invested over Rs. 2 billion in more than 45 startups, connecting entrepreneurs with global investors, mentors, and market access. The Lankan Angel Network’s involvement along with hatch co-working space and Dialog Axiata ensure participating young innovators gain critical support to accelerate their ventures on both national and international stages.

This collaborative effort between S. Thomas’ College, Sampath Bank PLC, Lankan Angel Network, and other ecosystem partners embodies a bold vision: to inspire an island-wide culture of entrepreneurship, create opportunities for youth, and drive Sri Lanka’s innovation agenda forward.

S. Thomas College 175th Anniversary Celebrations are taking place through several events that have engaged the student community across Sri Lanka during 2025 and will continue with a series of Special Events through 2026.