Landscaping of areas bordering Kadawatha Mirigama Highway

When we talk about forestry programmes, such as the recently launched Wanaspathi, we think of planting trees only in isolated locations. However, the reservations along rural roads, around urban areas, are also potential locations for planting trees, thereby creating aesthetically appealing landscapes for travellers along those roads. This type of interventions can be implemented as a demonstration with the assistance of the Chinese contractor who is constructing the Kadawatha Mirigama Highway. Cost would be only about 0.01% of the Capital cost of Highway Construction. But the value addition is immense.

Reservations of roads and streams are owned by the government. Those Reservations, which extend to about 10 to 20 meters, on either side, are not actively protected in Sri Lanka, though it is very common in other countries. Therefore, the public use of this land can be considered as a fair use of the land. Another purpose of this proposal is to introduce an intervention to connect the isolated Forest Patches in urban areas using the reservations of roads by planting trees so that those strips act also as Bio Corridors for local bird species while enhancing the tree cover at national level. When the above concept is introduced along the Kadawatha Mirigama Highway, isolated forest patches, such as Gampaha Botanical Garden, play the role of a Bio Cities. By planting trees along rural roads, adjacent to the highway, which are managed by the PRDA-WP, those roads could play the role of Bio Corridors connecting isolated forest patches around the Gampaha Botanical Garden. By implementing this project, Community Awareness about the Biodiversity in Sri Lanka also could be increased. Note that Sri Lanka is one of 36 biodiversity hotspots in the world.

In Sri Lanka, the concept of Bio Corridor was introduced in 1988 under a project called Mahaweli Agriculture and Rural Development project implemented in System B under an USAID funded programme. Similar to highways which connect main cities, in this case the Bio Corridors were introduced as “Bio Highways” connecting fragmented forest patches (“Bio Cities”) in agriculture landscapes. At the same time those corridors were improved as Cycle Tracks for the local farmers.In 2010, similar intervention was introduced in the Gampaha District in parallel with a flood mitigation project implemented by the Provincial Road Development Authority of Western Province (PRDA-WP). For example, in this project while streams were improved to mitigate floods, riparian forest tree belts were also introduced using Bio Engineering Technologies to strengthen the stream banks structurally. Later, the part of that stream running adjacent to Gampaha Town was improved as Recreational purposes such as Jogging tracks for urban communities. Trees were also planted along road reservations within the Gampaha District. Note that a technical paper published highlighting the achievements of this project won the First Prize in a competition held by the Institution of Engineers Sri Lanka (IESL)-2012 on Water Related Bio Engineering Interventions.

The Kadawatha Mirigama Highway project could be interpreted as Carbon Dioxide Fixation project because Forest cover is increased due to the above intervention. Note that the Chinese entities are key buyers of carbon credits, primarily for compliance in the national Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS), which requires companies to use China Certified Emissions Reductions (CCERs) to offset the Carbon Dioxide emissions. Contractor who is doing the Kadawatha Mirigama Road (Chinese state-owned company Metallurgical Corporation of China Limited) is also a Chinese company. Therefore, they might fund this tree plantation programme jointly with companies emitting Carbon Dioxide in China.

Legends of the Wild: A tribute to Sri Lanka’s vanishing giants

Blessed Are the Peacemakers: Middle East Peace Plan and Prospects

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.