Aitken Spence Travels achieves prestigious GSTC certification, setting a new benchmark

Aitken Spence Travels, Sri Lanka’s leading Destination Management Company, is delighted to announce the achievement of the internationally recognized certification from the Global Sustainable Tourism Council (GSTC), marking a historic milestone in the company’s sustainability journey.

The GSTC provides the world’s most comprehensive and respected framework for sustainable tourism, built upon four key pillars: sustainable management, socio-economic benefits to local communities, preservation of cultural heritage, and environmental responsibility.

Achieving GSTC certification is not an easy task but a rigorous and demanding process. It requires company wide engagement, supply chain compliance, continuous monitoring of environmental performance, extensive documentation and independent third-party on-site audits by a GSTC accredited body. It goes far beyond compliance embedding sustainability into the company corporate strategy, operational processes, and decision making frameworks.

At Aitken Spence Travels, this certification confirms that sustainability principles are actively implemented and independently verified across the organisation. It reflects a measurable commitment that goes beyond policy and into real operational impact.

Commenting on the achievement, . Nalin Jayasundera, Managing Director of Aitken Spence Travels, stated “This achievement represents the highest recognition of all sustainability certifications, and we are proud to be among a very few DMC’s who have GSTC and Travelife certification. Sustainability at ASTL is not an isolated initiative. We drive it with clear leadership direction and strong governance. The GSTC certification represents the highest global benchmark in sustainable tourism. At ASTL, sustainability is not a standalone initiative, it is embedded in our strategic direction and governance framework. We operate with strong alignment and support from the wider Aitken Spence PLC Group, ensuring our strategies are fully synchronised and our impact is cohesive, measurable, and meaningful. As a leader in tourism, we believe in walking the talk. This certification affirms that our commitment to responsible tourism is authentic, structured, and deeply integrated across the organization.”

As global travelers become more conscious of their environmental and social footprint, GSTC certification provides assurance that Aitken Spence Travels delivers experiences that respect Sri Lanka’s ecosystems, protect cultural heritage, and generate meaningful socio-economic benefits for local communities not only for today but for the sustenance of its future bookings too.

Bourse springs to life as bargain-hunting of valuable stocks accelerates

ComBank honoured as a leader in sustainability reporting at ACCA Awards

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.