Browns’ General Trading honoured at Construct Exhibition 2025

Browns General Trading was proud to have been recognised as the ‘Best Displayed Stall,’ under the Hardware & Tools category at the renowned Construct Exhibition 2025, held recently at the BMICH. Organised by the National Construction Association of Sri Lanka (NCASL) for the 22nd consecutive year, the event is one of the most prestigious and anticipated conventions in the building and construction industry’s annual calendar.

Held this year under the theme, ‘Together We Can Build,’ the platform brought together leaders, builders, designers and other key industry stakeholders to showcase the latest innovations that are shaping and leading the sector.

With its sleek, state-of-the-art Makita power tools, Tailin cutting wheels, Eclipse hand tools, JK files, a range of pressure washers, vacuum cleaners and generators, Juba inverter welding machines and agricultural tools under the Lion brand, Browns General Trading made a lasting impression at Construct 2025. The vibrant and interactive stall encompassed live demonstrations throughout all three days, captivating all who visited the space.

Commenting on the accolade, Ajith De Silva, Cluster Chief Operating Officer, Automotive & Hardware – Brown & Company PLC said, “We are honoured to receive this recognition at Construct 2025. It reflects the dedication and passion of our team, as well as our ongoing commitment to delivering world-class tools and solutions that build and sustain Sri Lanka, while transforming its ever-changing construction landscape.”

Established in 1875, Browns has flourished over the years to grow into a household name with a reputation as strong as its years are long. Today, the prestigious Browns Group is one of Sri Lanka’s largest diversified conglomerates, which manages a fast growing and valuable portfolio of brands across several key industry sectors, such as automotive, power generation, agriculture and plantation, pharmaceuticals, investments, marine and manufacturing as well as leisure.

Mark and Comm presents strategic communications framework to Deputy Minister for Sri Lanka’s USD15b digital economy transformation

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.