Trump pardons former Dominican President, Juan Hernandez

Hostilities against Venezuela escalated, President Maduro accused of trafficking illegal drugs

Who had been convicted by a New York Court for trafficking illegal drugs

In recent months, there have been escalating hostilities between US President Trump and Venezuela President Nicolas Maduro. The United States has been accusing Maduro of being the leader of the narco-terrorist organization designated as the “Cartel de los Soles”, responsible for trafficking drugs into the United States.

Neither Trump nor US Secretary of State, Marco Rubio, who made this claim in July, has provided a shred of evidence. Experts say that Cartel de los Soles is not a cartel, but a term used to describe alleged criminal networks within the armed forces of Venezuela, presumably led by Maduro, who are, again allegedly involved in the international drug trade. They pose no danger to the safety of the United States.

On the other hand, Maduro has accused the US drug offensive as an excuse for orchestrating regime change with the object of seizing Venezuelan oil.

Maduro is widely considered a dictator, leading an authoritarian government, rife with serious human rights violations, electoral fraud, and severe economic hardship, despite being an oil-rich country. But there are differences – Maduro is just 63 years old, has over a decade’s experience as a dictator, boasts a swarthy skin color without a tinge of orange and a luxuriant moustache.

The United States has been committing acts of war on the open seas, and conducted its 22nd strike on unidentified boats last Thursday. These strikes against suspected drug carrying vessels in the Caribbean have so far killed over 80 people, whom the Trump administration alleges are drug-trafficking terrorists smuggling drugs into the US, responsible for the deaths of thousands of Americans.

The strikes are random, and no evidence, not even an explanation, has been provided for its decision to attack these unidentified boats. Congress has not been informed of these bombings, and funds have not been allocated for the project.

The UN’s Human Rights chief has condemned these attacks on the Caribbean “violate international law and amount to extrajudicial killings”. In other words, they are war crimes.

As Republican Senator Rand Paul said, “We don’t know who’s in these boats. There could be people being trafficked, as opposed to alleged traffickers in international waters who have been killed in these strikes”.

Due process seems to be deleted in Trump’s new and improved constitution, and the penalty for drug trafficking, even if found guilty, is execution.

The most disgustingly cruel attack was carried out last Monday. It was noticed that there were two survivors, clinging to the boat. Regular rules of war require that survivors of such attacks are rescued. But regular rules do not seem to apply to the current US military. Admiral Bradley, on the instructions of the Secretary of War, Pete Hegseth, ordered a second bombing of the same boat (a “double tap” in cynical military parlance), killing the survivors. Hegseth’s actual words were “Kill them all”.

Everyone is pointing fingers at who was responsible for the second bombing, though the buck must stop with the President, who was aware, indeed approved of, these illegal bombings.

Secretary of State, Marco Rubio, stated that no one had the power to dictate to the United States how it should defend itself. But to “defend itself” by bombing boats in the open seas, nowhere near the US coast and presenting no danger to the United States, seems rather excessive. As illegally excessive as the USA invading Iraq in 2003 on the false assertion that Saddam Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction, and was preparing to use them on his own people.

Trump is displaying aggression against Venezuela, bombing small boats in international seas, calling it an act of war with no evidence and amassing troops and battleships on the Venezuelan coastline. He is also threatening to commence a CIA operation with the objective of regime change. All these actions are eerily reminiscent of the reasons given for the illegal war against Iraq in 2003, with the Bush administration lying to Congress about Saddam possessing weapons of mass destruction. The original lie that Iraq was responsible for providing the terrorists of 9/11 had long been debunked.

The Bush administration stated that the United States will defeat Saddam’s army within weeks and the USA will be hailed as “liberators”. We all know the disaster caused by that war, with the loss of hundreds of thousands of Americans and Iraqis, men, women and children and the destruction of property.

The ultimate motive for that war was to get control of Iraq’s oil reserves.Venezuela has the largest proven oil reserves in the world. And an unpopular dictator. Is Trump, the “Peacemaker” planning another war to seize control of Venezuela’s oil reserves”?

The UN charter states: “All members of armed forces must comply with their internal operating procedures and military manuals and strictly abide by international law. Officers should refuse superior orders where these are manifest violation of the law and may result in a serious violation of human rights, including extrajudicial executions”.

Trump is nothing if not unpredictable. He is currently considering declaring war against Venezuela, having already bombed 22 vessels in the Caribbean, killing over 80 people. An ongoing operation, without an ounce of proof that Venezuela presents any danger, by way of trafficking illegal drugs or any other form of aggression, to threaten the safety of the United States.

Then last Monday, Trump formally gave a full and unconditional pardon to former Honduran President Juan Orlando Hernandez. Hernandez had been convicted and sentenced by a New York district court last year, to 45 years in prison and given $8 million fine by a US judge for – you got it right – illegal drug trafficking.

CNN has reported that Hernandez conspired with drug cartels during his tenure as president as they moved more than 400 tons of cocaine through Honduras to the United States. Man, that’s a whole lot of cocaine! Hernandez received millions of dollars in bribes from El Chapo and the cartels that he used for his rise in politics.

Pardon for corruption and trafficking in 400 tons of cocaine against the death penalty for suspicion of smuggling by boat perhaps a few hundred pounds of illegal drugs seem the current standard of the law of the current Trump administration.

White House Press Secretary, Karoline Leavitt stated that President Trump had been persuaded to pardon Hernandez because of the unfair treatment he had suffered under the Biden administration. Biden’s fault, again, almost a year after the end of his presidency.

Every member involved in these extra judicial bombings of unidentified boats in the Caribbean, from the airplane bomber to the Secretary of War is guilty of the crime of refusing to obey obviously illegal orders. These bombings of unidentified vessels in the open seas are clearly illegal, according to the section of the UN Charter cited above.

Probably prompted by these illegal bombings, and Trump’s unconstitutional use of the federal military as a “training ground” in Democratic cities, six congressional Democrats, all either former military or intelligence officials released a 90-second video, advising the US military and national security, that it is okay, in fact, it is mandatory, that illegal orders be refused. A rule not just applicable to the military community but to the general public.

The message, delivered by a social media video from Retired Admiral, Astronaut and Senator from Arizona, Mark Kelly and five other members of Congress who had all served in the military and intelligence, served as a reminder to military and intelligence personnel “that they are legally obligated to refuse unlawful orders that violate the constitution or US laws”.

“Our laws are clear. You can refuse illegal orders. In fact you must refuse illegal orders”.

This video was followed by Trump’s famous, unusually succinct tweet on Truth Social: “Seditious behavior, punishable by DEATH”. He has instructed his Attorney General, Pam Bondi, to initiate actions against all six lawmakers on charges of sedition. In addition, he has instructed retired Naval Admiral Senator Mark Kelly to be recalled to service at the navy to be court-martialed for his perfectly legal action, one that falls within the First Amendment of free speech.

Trump may have finally exceeded his authority that he may be losing the support of members of his base. And the Epstein Files are looming, due to be released to Congress by court order in two weeks.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.