IMF staff-level agreement unrelated to any agreement on successor programme

Colombo, Oct. 6 (Daily Mirror) - The IMF (International Monetary Fund) announcement of the staff-level agreement is unrelated to any request by the government for a successor programme, according to a spokesperson from it.

The international lender did not receive any such request from the government even by yesterday.

“We still have two reviews left under the ongoing Extended Fund Facility (EFF) arrangement, which is in place through March 2027. Hence, the immediate priority should be on getting the current programme to the finish line.

The staff-level agreement (SLA) announced yesterday relates to the agreement reached between IMF staff and Sri Lankan authorities on the economic policies to conclude the Seventh Review of Sri Lanka’s reform programme supported by the EFF. Hence, the SLA is about the ongoing EFF arrangement and is unrelated to the request for a successor arrangement.

The SLA is subject to IMF Executive Board approval, contingent on (i) the presentation by the Minister of Finance to Parliament of the 2027 Budget, in line with programme parameters and (ii) the completion of the financing assurances review to confirm multilateral partners’ financing contributions and assess adequate progress with debt restructuring.

Once the Seventh Review is approved by the IMF Executive Board, Sri Lanka will have access to about US$345 million in financing,” the spokesperson said.

Meanwhile, IMF Mission Chief for Sri Lanka Evan Papageorgiou said yesterday, after the conclusion of the SLA, “Upon completion of the Executive Board review, Sri Lanka would have access to SDR 254 million (about US$345 million), bringing the total IMF financial support disbursed under this arrangement to SDR 2.032 billion (about US$2.7 billion).

“Sri Lanka’s economy has proved remarkably resilient to successive shocks. Economic activity expanded by 4.2 per cent in 2026Q2, marking eleven consecutive quarters of strong growth. At 8 per cent y/y in September, headline inflation remains in single digits. Gross official reserves have increased, reaching US$6.9 billion at end-August 2026. Banks remain well capitalised and profitable. Fiscal outturn in 2026H1 was strong and debt restructuring is largely completed.

“However, Sri Lanka continues to face downside risks from uncertainty over the duration and intensity of the Middle East war, global trade policy, and the impact of El Niño. Safeguarding macroeconomic stability in a shock-prone environment requires continuing with prudent policies and bold reforms to protect the hard-won gains of the programme,”

In response to a protracted Middle East war, he said that the government should allow domestic fuel prices to adjust in line with international fuel price movements and preserve cost-recovery energy pricing, while protecting the vulnerable.