Hettich celebrates decade in Sri Lanka with landmark Partner Meet in Colombo

From left: Hettich Group Managing Director Timo Pieper, Advisory Board Chairman Dr. Andreas Hettich, Hettich India Chairman S.K. Poddar, Director Akshay Poddar, Hettich India, SAARC, Middle East and Africa Managing Director Andre Eckholt, India and SAARC Director – Sales Rahul Thakkar, and Sri Lanka Country Manager Milroy Shanmugarajah

Cake-cutting (from left): Hettich India and SAARC Director – Sales Rahul Thakkar, Hettich Group Advisory Board Chairman Dr. Andreas Hettich, Hettich India Chairman S.K. Poddar, Director Akshay Poddar, Hettich India, SAARC, Middle East and Africa Managing Director Andre Eckholt, and Hettich Group Managing Director Timo Pieper

From left:  Hettich India, SAARC, Middle East and Africa Chief Marketing Officer Jiteen Agarwal, Vallibel One Managing Director Dinusha Bhaskaran, Delmege Group Chairman Jit Gunaratne, Hettich India Director Akshay Poddar, Chairman S.K. Poddar, Hettich Group Advisory Board Chairman Dr. Andreas Hettich, Hettich India, SAARC, Middle East and Africa Managing Director Andre Eckholt, Hettich Group Managing Director Timo Pieper, Hettich India and SAARC Director – Sales Rahul Thakkar

Global furniture fittings leader marks 10 years of growth and partnership in Sri Lanka and unveils Blaupunkt built-in kitchen appliances

Hettich, the globally renowned German manufacturer of furniture fittings and architectural hardware known for its state-of-the-art manufacturing plants and magical interior solutions across the world celebrated a significant milestone in Sri Lanka, marking 10 years of presence in the country with its inaugural Partner Meet in Colombo.

The landmark event brought together Hettich’s key partners, stakeholders and industry leaders to celebrate a decade of growth, collaboration and shared success, while reaffirming the company’s long-term commitment to the Sri Lankan market.

Over the past decade, Hettich has strengthened its presence in Sri Lanka through its focus on German engineering, innovation, quality and functionality, contributing to the creation of contemporary and intelligently designed living and working spaces across the country.

The gala evening was graced by a distinguished delegation of senior leaders, including Hettich Group Advisory Board Chairman Dr. Andreas Hettich, Hettich India and Adventz Group Chairman S.K. Poddar, Hettich India Director Akshay Poddar, Hettich SAARC, Middle East and Africa Managing Director Andre Eckholt, Hettich India and SAARC Director – Sales Rahul Thakkar, and Vallibel One Managing Director Dinusha Bhaskaran.

Their presence underscored the importance of the Sri Lankan market to Hettich and reflected the strong relationships and partnerships that have supported the brand’s growth over the past decade.

Adding further significance to the occasion, Hettich unveiled its award-winning Blaupunkt built-in kitchen appliances in Sri Lanka. The introduction marks an important expansion of Hettich’s offering in the local market, complementing its furniture fittings expertise with sophisticated kitchen solutions that combine contemporary design, functionality and technology.

Hettich SAARC, Middle East and Africa Managing Director Andre Eckholt said: “Sri Lanka is an extremely important market for us, and the past 10 years have been a journey built on trust, collaboration and strong partnerships. Being closer to the Sri Lankan market has enabled us to better understand the evolving needs of our customers. This Partner Meet is an opportunity to celebrate that journey with everyone who has contributed to our success. The introduction of Blaupunkt built-in kitchen appliances marks another exciting chapter for us, and we look forward to building on this momentum in the years ahead.”

The milestone celebration not only recognised Hettich’s journey over the past decade but also set the stage for its next phase of growth in Sri Lanka, driven by innovation, strong partnerships and an evolving portfolio of magical solutions designed for modern living.

Customers, architects, interior designers and industry professionals are invited to experience the range of Blaupunkt built-in kitchen appliances at the Hettich Experience Centre, located at