South Asia’s first-ever Reggae Music Festival “ONE LOVE 2026” set to ignite Bentota

NUWA Sri Lanka Hosts Star-Studded Press Conference to Kick-Off the Road to the Festival

Sri Lanka is set to make history as it hosts South Asia’s first-ever Reggae Music Festival, “ONE LOVE 2026 – A Tribute to Bob Marley”, from 27 to 29 March 2026 on the golden shores of Bentota. The three-day festival will take place from 6:00 p.m. onwards, bringing an unprecedented celebration of global reggae culture to the region. The press conference to announce this historic moment was held at NUWA Sri Lanka, the latest ultra-luxury property in Colombo.

This landmark festival will feature six internationally acclaimed reggae icons—the largest gathering of global reggae talent ever seen in Asia and the Pacific:

• Julian Marley & Ky-Mani Marley – sons of the legendary Bob Marley

• The festival will also feature four international DJs, with two major artists headlining each night:

Adding to the excitement, Kingsley Ben-Adir, the lead actor in the 2024 musical drama One Love, and its director Reinaldo Marcus Green, are also set to attend the festival.

With reggae’s deep cultural resonance in Sri Lanka, the festival is expected to draw thousands of local fans along with visitors from India, the Maldives, Bangladesh, and Western travelers escaping winter for Sri Lanka’s tropical warmth.

Organised by Sri Lankan-owned One In A Million Entertainment Ltd., headquartered in Europe and Colombo, in collaboration with Caribbean Entertainment, the event builds on a legacy of bringing global stars such as Shaggy, Diana King, Maxi Priest, and Big Mountain to Sri Lanka.

The event aligns with the celebration of Bob Marley’s 81st birthday on 6 February, enriching its cultural and emotional significance. Normal tickets are priced at Rs.10,000 per day and VIP tickets are priced at Rs. 50,000 per day. For all Reggae music enthusiasts wanting a Festival Pass for all three days, there is an Early Bird Offer at Rs. 25,000 (normal tickets) and Rs. 125,000 (VIP tickets). Tickets will be available on the PickMe Events platform.

A part of the proceeds from One Love Festival ticket sales will be donated to children’s orphanages water purification project carried out by the Indian Cultural Association in Sri Lanka. One Love Festival is also working with the Bob and Rita Marley Foundation to support its charity activities in Jamaica.

The festival’s international artist delegation—an estimated 70-member crew—will be hosted at the iconic NUWA Sri Lanka, Colombo’s newest ultra-luxury lifestyle and entertainment destination owned by Melco Resorts & Entertainment.

Speaking on the partnership, Michael Habashi, Vice President & Property General Manager of City of Dreams Sri Lanka, said: “City of Dreams Sri Lanka is proud to be the hospitality partner of South Asia’s first Reggae Festival. As Colombo’s emerging entertainment hub, we are committed to strengthening the city’s cultural and artistic fabric. Welcoming world-renowned reggae legends reflects our mission to champion creativity, support the arts, and bring globally iconic experiences to Sri Lanka.”

Code of Ethics for capital market influencers in the pipeline

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.