El Niño and cloud seeding

RCyAF/ SLAF, Air Ceylon, Air Lanka, Singapore Airlines and SriLankan Airlines

Meteorologists have declared that the weather phenomenon known as ‘El Niño’ is upon us. Monsoon rains are anticipated to fail, and farmers will face untold hardship. No water will be available for hydroelectric power, and if the forecasts are correct and the situation continues, soon there will be regular power supply interruptions. In short, the country will be facing a potential crisis.

Which leads me to wonder whether our officials have considered the practice of seeding the clouds. The process called ‘cloud seeding’ can enhance potential rain clouds to produce rain and mitigate the effects of ‘El Niño’, thus improving the water table. Raindrops usually form around small particles, like dust, ice and salt crystals, called nuclei. By introducing more nuclei into a cloud for the raindrops to form around, the rain cloud could be enhanced. The chemicals used for nuclei production are silver iodide (AgI) crystals and dry ice (carbon dioxide). The ‘seeds’ are dispersed into the cloud by using airplanes equipped with electronically activated flares, ground-based rockets, anti-aircraft shells from the ground, or by creating large fires to generate smoke which would provide sufficient nuclei.

(Some readers may remember that many years ago, when the Kolonnawa oil tanks burned, after an LTTE attack, the smoke cloud rose to a high altitude and then mushroomed out, producing rain.)

The last of these options is possible only when there is no wind. In our case, however, the Southwest monsoon winds have already set in. These masses of air have travelled literally thousands of miles over the sea and are laden with moisture.

The Trailing Edge of the wing with Silver Iodide Flares working

If you are on the southwest side of the island and glance up at the sky, you will observe that the clouds are moving northeast (wind direction is from where it blows, not to where it goes; in other words, a northwesterly wind blows from the northwest, not towards it). As the clouds reach the central hills, they are subjected to a phenomenon called ‘orographic lift’, whereby air masses are lifted, or raised, to a higher level. Consequently, the air cools quickly, producing condensation and heavy rain, provided there are sufficient nuclei present.

In ‘Operation Popeye’, from 1967 to 1972, USA scientists modified the monsoon weather in Vietnam by cloud seeding, to harass the Viet Cong on their supply routes along the Ho Chi Minh Trail, with the extra 30 to 45 days of rain producing mud and landslides. More recently, on the eve of the 2008 Olympic Games, the Chinese fired rockets into clouds to force heavy rains in order to improve air quality and provide good weather on the opening day.

However, if the wind is not anticipated correctly, disastrous results could occur. Once, in the early 1980s, Saudi Arabia seeded its clouds and the wind unexpectedly changed, bringing heavy rainfall, including hail, to the United Arab Emirates and Oman. The southwesterly winds in Sri Lanka are usually steady. Observing the clouds from both the ground and air, they are characterised by considerable vertical development and, therefore, ripe for seeding.

The easiest way to seed clouds would be from the air. The Sri Lanka Air Force has aircraft and experienced pilots who can carry out such an operation effectively. If we seed the clouds to the south of Ratmalana, rain will fall somewhere northeast of that point. This will, of course, be predicated by the prevalent wind direction and speed for that day.

Even if the Meteorological Department gets the direction and wind speed wrong, it could be cross-checked by having the wind read on the display of an airplane equipped with an Inertial Navigation System, that is flying at or above 15,000ft, thus enabling a plot of the actual winds just before the process begins. Knowing the prevalent speed (or strength) and direction of the winds, pilots could easily work out the optimum point over which they should start the seeding process.

I believe that the Sri Lankan Air Force has the right sort of airplane for the job. If not, we could use readings from airliners departing from Katunayake, on the Colombo-Singapore route, to estimate the actual wind direction and speed. The target area of rainfall should be over Kotmale, which has the most critical reservoir during the Southwest Monsoon, and fortuitously that route passes overhead Kotmale.

We could also ask China, India and Thailand for expert advice. There are so many possibilities if we only care to look. It can be done. The benefit of rain at the correct places at this point of time outweighs the cost of such an operation.

As the old adage goes, desperate times need desperate measures. So, why not give it a try?

Behavioural patterns of mosquitoes and their impact on spread of Dengue infection

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.