Journey’s end: Reflecting, speaking, and writing on Martin Wickramasinghe

“We only see what we look at. To look is an act of choice. “

On Tuesday, 31 March 2026, the Martin Wickramasinghe Trust will hold a special lecture on the novelist, critic, journalist, and thinker Martin Wickramasinghe in the Garden Gallery at Sapumal Foundation. Moderated by Samindi Warnasooriya from Open University, with opening remarks by Avishka Mario Senewiratne and closing remarks by Hasini Haputhanthri, it will focus on Wickramasinghe’s views on art and art history.

This is the seventh in a series of lectures undertaken by the Trust. It is also the last. The first of them was a webinar which was organised by the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS) in the UK. The second was a presentation at the India International Centre in New Delhi. Both took place within a week of each other: 13 and 20 November. The following week, on 27 November, the night Cyclone Ditwah struck Sri Lanka, the Trust held the first of its lectures in Sri Lanka at Lakmahal Community Library.

Each of these presentations has focused on specific aspects to Wickramasinghe, his life, work, and thought. The SOAS webinar was a general lecture, framing Wickramasinghe as a Sri Lankan and South Asian mind. The New Delhi lecture dissected his writings against the backdrop of modernism in Sri Lanka and India. The Lakmahal presentation focused on the books and authors he read when he was in Colombo from 1906 to 1916 and how these influenced him. Lectures at the Social Scientists’ Association, on 10 December, and the International Centre for Ethnic Studies (ICES) Colombo, on 6 February 2026, framed him as a social scientist, with the SSA lecture focusing on his political writings.

Between these two events, the Marga Institute organised another on 26 January. For various reasons, this was the least attended in the series. Yet by far it was the most challenging. Titled “Disintegration, Transformation, and Development”, it delved into perhaps the least known aspect of Wickramasinghe’s career, his writings on development.

Placing him against the social and economic conditions of his time, the Marga lecture went on to examine his encounters with radical politics and capitalism in Colombo, at first as a shop assistant and later an employee of the formidable D. R. Wijewardene. The relationship between Wickramasinghe and Wijewardene, in particular, has been written about many times. Yet we know little about how it moulded his career. It is clear that through D. R. Wijewardene and his colleagues, Wickramasinghe accessed a world he had not been privy to until then. The lecture explained how this shaped his writings.

For someone who wrote so extensively on such a wide range of topics, it is astonishing how Wickramasinghe has been restricted today to a handful of novels and other works. Most Sri Lankans, especially Sinhala-speakers, identify him as the author of Madol Duwa, the Koggala Trilogy, and Viragaya. Even if they have not read these texts, it is as their author that Wickramasinghe is celebrated and venerated today, by scholars, students, and every other Sri Lankan. Part of the rationale for these lectures has been to compel audiences to think differently about him. They were timed for his 135th birth anniversary, which fell last year, and his 50th death anniversary, which falls this July.

The seven lectures mark a culmination and a midpoint in a wider, more ambitious research initiative. Almost exactly two years ago, in March 2024, I undertook an assignment on Martin Wickramasinghe. The assignment would involve months of research and ultimately lead to two publications. At the time I had finished one book, a collection of essays which I edited with one of my assistants. This would be my first serious research engagement. As of now, it remains the most ambitious and wide-ranging I have undertaken.

As I went about brainstorming the modalities, including the timelines, I realised the research was going to be harder and that it was going to take longer than I thought. With patronage from the Martin Wickramasinghe Trust, I began work officially in November 2024 and went on until February the following year. Wrapping up preliminary research, including catalogues of Wickramasinghe’s books and his newspaper articles, I commenced the second phase of the research with interviews. The first of these interviews was with Dr Sarath Amunugama; it was followed by conversations with 15 or so others who knew him, worked with him, or studied him. One of the most interesting of these interviews was with the ornithologist Professor Sarath Kotagama, who highlighted another aspect to Wickramasinghe which has been overlooked, his advocacy of simple science terms in Sinhala.

These interviews more or less ended after April. Then a leg injury involving my tendon prevented me from continuing work for four months. It was at the end of my recovery period when, through the intervention of a well-wisher and a mentor, plans were made to organise a series of lectures in Sri Lanka and elsewhere. These lectures would serve two purposes: encourage people, in and outside Sri Lanka, to approach Wickramasinghe from a different angle, and get feedback from them to inform our publication.

By now, the idea of two publications had transformed into one: a comprehensive study of Wickramasinghe. At first, I defined it as a coffee table book. When I suggested this to a renowned historian, however, the response was instantaneous.

ICES lecture, opening remarks by Ambassador Ravinatha Aryasinha and closing remarks by Priyanthi Fernando

“Why is it only a coffee table book? Who wants a coffee table book on Wickramasinghe, it is ridiculous. Do a proper biography.”

By then I had read two books which helped me reframe the structure of this work: Shanti Jayewardene’s excellent study of Geoffrey Bawa, Geoffrey Manning Bawa: Decolonializing Architecture, and SinhaRaja Tammita-Delgoda’s equally exceptional study of George Keyt, Absence of a Desired Image. They had been published seven years of each other, and I had been involved in the latter as research coordinator. Both books, and their authors, got me to think anew about the format and aims of my study.

With Martin Wickramasinghe the challenge is while he remains renowned and celebrated, he has yet to be the subject of a separate study. This has been in part due to the reputation he enjoys as Sri Lanka’s definitive man of letters. The author of 13 novels, as well as several short stories, has always been a national figure, as much to be venerated as to be read. Yet limited to a particular frame of reference, he has never been seen as more than a Sri Lankan thinker. He thought and wrote far ahead of many of his contemporaries.

Indeed, for the serious student of Sri Lankan and South Asian literature, he comes across as something of an enigma: a self-taught man, emerging from the backdrop of a deeply colonised society, discovering new modes of thinking and conveying them, in his language and in the language of the coloniser, English, to locals and foreigners.

My point is that Wickramasinghe’s interests straddled different fields, and it would be wrong to limit his contribution to the 13 or so novels that bear his name. Yet it is also wrong to isolate them from the corpus of his other writings. As I mentioned in my Marga lecture, the Koggala Trilogy, which is touted as the definitive Sinhalese work of fiction, was rooted in his experiences in Koggala and Colombo: the transformations which had become a part of the city and the village in early 20th century Ceylon. Indeed, there are passages in Upan Da Sita, his autobiography, which give us interesting glimpses into the social and class structures of his village. Like Fernand Braudel exploring the history of France towards the end of his life, Wickramasinghe uses these anecdotes to make sense of a way of life, a way of looking at the world, a way of seeing, which helps us understand our past better.

For this reason, I have decided to title the final lecture “Ways of Looking.” Ultimately, it is what Wickramasinghe saw as he grew up, what he found in what he saw, and what he made of what he found, which defines his life, career, and thought. The Sapumal presentation will, hopefully, be followed by other interventions, including a film. Yet for the time being, they have served their purpose. All that is left, and all that I am engaged with now, is the book – one that will set out not just his evolution as a writer, but the evolution of modern Sri Lanka through the mind and eye of one of its most recognisable cultural figures.

Uditha Devapriya is an independent researcher, author, columnist, and analyst whose work spans international relations, history, anthropology, and politics. He holds an LL.B. from the University of London and a Postgraduate Diploma in International Relations from the Bandaranaike Centre for International Studies (BCIS). In 2024 he was a participant in the International Visitor Leadership Program (IVLP) conducted by the US State Department. From 2022 to 2025 he served as Chief International Relations Analyst at Factum, an Asia-Pacific focused foreign policy think-tank. In 2025 he did two lecture stints in India, one as a Resident Fellow at the Kautilya School of Public Policy in Hyderabad and another on art and culture at the India International Centre in New Delhi. Since 2023, he has authored books on Sri Lankan institutions and public figures while pursuing research projects spanning art, culture, history, and geopolitics. He can be reached at udakdev1@gmail.com.

Sri Lanka to Host Landmark World Congress on Snakes in Kandy

Free school uniform decision taken in minutes on a platform in Bakmuna

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.