Vegetable prices may rise further, farmers warn

Colombo, June 17 (Daily Mirror) - Vegetable prices across Sri Lanka are beginning to feel the pressure of a deepening crisis in the agricultural sector, with farmers warning that the situation could worsen sharply in the coming weeks.

Chairman of the National Agrarian unity Association, Anuradha Tennakoon said the prices of vegetables have increased greatly due to the ongoing fertilizer crisis.

Speaking to the Daily Mirror, Tennakoon further said vegetable prices could increase to unbearable levels by July if the current shortage continues.

According to him, wholesale prices at the Dambulla Dedicated Economic Centre have increased significantly. A kilogram of moringa was sold at Rs. 700.00 yesterday (15) while green chillies were priced between Rs. 600.00 and Rs. 650.00 per kilogram.

Tomatoes were sold at Rs. 550/600 per kilogram, while beans and bitter gourd were priced between Rs. 500.00 and Rs. 550.00. The wholesale prices of brinjal and snake gourd also increased to Rs. 400/450 per kilogram.

Tennakoon said that fertilizer, including urea, which are essential for vegetable cultivation, were supplied nearly two months late. As a result, the production of vegetables such as carrots, beans, leeks and capsicum in the upcountry, as well as okra, pumpkin and brinjal grown in the dry zone, has dropped sharply.

He also said that the number of wholesalers and mobile traders visiting markets has declined because of the high prices.

"During the Yala season, which began in March, around 50 percent of farmers abandoned cultivation due to fertilizer shortages, high fertilizer prices and a lack of quality seeds." he added.

Tennakoon further points out that, neither the Ministry of Trade nor the Department of Agriculture has accurate data on the country's daily and monthly vegetable requirements.

"Without proper data, it is difficult to plan cultivation to meet national demand" he said.

He warned that if local production continues to decline, Sri Lanka may have to rely heavily on imported vegetables to meet consumer demand.

According to Tennakoon, some vegetables are already being imported for the country's tourism sector and five-star hotels. He said there is a possibility that the government may encourage large-scale vegetable imports from countries such as India and Pakistan in the future.

He pointed out that if local vegetable prices rise to between Rs. 1,000 and Rs. 1,500 per kilogram, imported vegetables could be sold at lower prices ranging from Rs. 300 to Rs. 500 per kilogram, providing some relief to consumers.

However, Tennakoon warned that increased imports could severely affect local vegetable farmers, who are already struggling with high production costs.