Night of Light, Culture, and Connection

While we, in Sri Lanka, celebrated Diwali on 20th October, it was a different scene in Melbourne, Australia, where this festival was celebrated on a grand scale on Friday, 03rd October.

The celebrations were organised by the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) and quite a few prominent Sri Lankans, in Melbourne, were invited as special guests.

Reports coming my way indicate that the spirit of Diwali shone brightly at this event that brought together over 800 guests from diverse cultural backgrounds, creating an atmosphere of unity, joy, and vibrant celebration.

Johann Dias Jayasinha, who has made significant contributions to cricket in Melbourne, is seen here with former Sri Lanka Test Cricket Captain, Dimuth Karunaratne, and Melbourne Stars General Manager Max Abbott

Known for handling high-profile events, renowned host, entrepreneur, and filmmaker Dheepa Awtani (Commoweath Bank), handled this happening scene, which included a dazzling showcase of Bollywood performances, colourful décor, and a sumptuous Indian-inspired dinner that delighted every guest.

Among the distinguished attendees were Ross Hepburn, Chair of Cricket Victoria; Max Abbott, General Manager, Melbourne Stars; Ken Jacobs, Senior Director, GlobalISE and former CEO of Cricket Victoria; Dimuth Karunaratne, former Sri Lanka Test Cricket Captain; Dr Luckmika Perera, Chris Perera, Shawn Mendis, Wikum Puimal, and Johann Dias Jayasinha who, incidentally, is a dedicated and experienced individual who has made significant contributions to cricket in Melbourne, particularly in promoting multicultural engagement and supporting the growth of the sport.

In fact, it was Johann, in coordination with host Dheepa, who invited the VVIP and VIP guests for this Diwali function.

The night was a perfect blend of corporate elegance and cultural festivity, celebrating the values of light, renewal, and togetherness. Guests enjoyed every moment, from the rhythmic dance performances to heartfelt conversations that highlighted the strength of Melbourne’s multicultural community.

As many reflected, it was “one of the best events in town” – a true testament to CBA’s commitment to inclusion, community, and celebration.

President seeks swift completion of university degrees: FUTA, now It’s your call

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.