HRCSL summons prison and security officials over recent unrest

Colombo, August 10 (Daily Mirror) - The Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka (HRCSL) has summoned senior officials from several key institutions for a special discussion following a series of tense incidents reported at prisons across the country.

According to HRCSL Commissioner Attorney-at-Law Nimal G. Punchihewa, the meeting is aimed at identifying necessary preventive measures and establishing mechanisms to ensure that similar incidents do not recur.

Accordingly, senior officials of the Department of Prisons, the Inspector General of Police (IGP), and secretaries of the relevant line ministries have been summoned to appear before the Commission on August 18.

Punchihewa warned that if an effective mechanism is not introduced to address the grievances and critical issues faced by prison inmates, the Commission may be compelled to bring the matter to the attention of the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) in Geneva.

Meanwhile, a number of recent incidents within the country’s prison system have raised concerns over security, alleged corruption and possible organized unrest. At least 36 inmates have died over the past month, although investigations into the circumstances surrounding these deaths are continuing.

Security has since been strengthened at correctional facilities across the country, with additional personnel deployed to maintain order and ensure the safety of inmates and prison staff.

Meanwhile, intelligence information has reportedly raised concerns over a possible plan by inmates at a prison in the southern region to stage an escape. Officials are taking precautionary measures to prevent any incidents and maintain order within the facilities.

A special discussion on the prevailing conditions in prisons and measures taken to ensure inmate safety and security was also held at the Presidential Secretariat under the patronage of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake.

An extensive discussion was held at the meeting on further measures required to ensure the safety and security of inmates at all 33 prisons across the country.

It was also decided to establish a joint mechanism to identify and address issues faced by inmates, oversee their welfare and determine appropriate measures to be taken in the event of an emergency.

Accordingly, a joint mechanism comprising prison officials, the Police, the Special Task Force and, where necessary, the Tri-Forces and other relevant stakeholders will be established next week covering all 33 prisons. The mechanism will also engage directly with prison inmates to further understand and address their concerns.