Working with Dr. Dahanayake and some advice to public servants

On February 28, 1986, I was chairing a conference on Co-operative Policy at the Agricultural Research and Training Institute (ARTI), which included a senior delegation of Cooperative experts from Sweden, when I received an urgent summons from the President. Such a summons were always somewhat destabilizing because you wondered as to what could have caused the head of State to suddenly send for you.

I went to the President’s office at Republic Square and met him. The President informed me that sometime previously he had promised the veteran Parliamentarian and former Prime Minister, Dr. W. Dahanayake a Cabinet post. He said further that he had been reminding him of this on a number of occasions, including recently. He therefore did not want to delay matters further, and wished to appoint him as Minister of Co-operatives. He wanted me to split the existing Ministry of Food and Co-operatives into two. Mr. Gamani Jayasuriya was to remain as Minister of Food.

The President said that he had already discussed matters with him. If this was what the President wanted done, I had to do it. I had however a fear that I would be appointed Secretary to the Ministry of Co-operatives. The reason for this was not that I thought the subject of Co-operatives unimportant. It in fact encompassed a vast area. The reason was that I was compelled to figure in a major clash with Dr. Dahanayake, in the Parliamentary Consultative Committee a few months earlier, when he, in my view quite unfairly went for my Commissioner of Co-operative Development.

On this occasion in Parliament, I waited patiently for a while thinking that matters would blow over. But when they didn’t and Dr. Dahanayake kept on attacking the Commissioner, not giving him a chance to speak, I intervened. He then turned his ire on me, and I took him on. We went at each other with raised voices until I remember my Minister Gamani Jayasuriya next to whom I was seated, squeezing my arm to restrain me. When the meeting was over and we were leaving, my officers who were very pleased at the defence I put up told me “Sir, did you realize that you were pointing your finger at Dr. Dahanayake?” I had not.

Evidently in the heat of the argument I had done so, and I did not feel good about it. Later, I did understand Arjuna Ranatunge, when he wagged his finger at Umpire Emerson. We tend to do this in the heat of the moment. In this context, I told the President, that I hoped that he would appoint a separate Secretary for Co-operatives. “No, Pieris, you be Secretary to both Ministries,” he replied. I then told him that I had a bit of a clash with Dr. Dahanayake in the Parliamentary Committee, and that he and I could feel uncomfortable working together.

“No, that’s alright, I will tell him that he has to work with you,” the President said. The matter was now concluded, and one had to abide by the decision. The President had only one more thing to say. “When you split the Ministry please do so with the least possible cost,” he said. I promised to do so. This was done, and on March 4, I accompanied Dr. Dahanayake to President’s House where he took his oaths, before the President.

He was in his eighties then. When we were leaving, in answer to a question from the waiting press, he said “Gentlemen, I shall get down to work. I have nothing to tell you now. You can come and interview me again when I reach my 100th birthday!”

We spent very little funds in setting up the new Ministry. It was located in the same premises as the Food Ministry in Union Place. We put Dr. Dahanayake in a spacious room on the ground floor, just below my room upstairs. I remained in my room, which was next to the room of Mr. Gamani Jayasuriya, now Minister of Food. I was in the unenviable position of having to serve two Ministers. I had to talk to them and determine how I could see both on a regular basis, in the interest of work.

This was not easy, given the busy schedules of Ministers, who also travelled a great deal within the country. In addition to this, Dr. Dahanayake’s Parliamentary constituency was Galle, over 100 k.m. from Colombo.

But one had to cope. The allocation of staff to the two Ministries had to be carefully done, taking into account also to a degree, personal preferences. A certain amount of partitioning of rooms and the creation of cubicles had to be done. Cars had to be re-allocated. These tasks may appear trivial. They are however never easy when it comes to actual implementation, due to personal preferences, resistance to change and differences of opinion, particularly in areas such as allocation of office space and cars. All in all, however, a smooth transition was effected.

Working with Dr. Dahanayake was an interesting and even a novel experience. One of the first things he said was that he wanted his office opened at six in the morning, because by 6.30 he wanted to come in and work. He did not have family responsibilities. Viewing the number of shocked faces before him, he affably said that he does not require any public servant to come in at that time, but only his office opened. Necessary arrangements were made.

It was no trouble working with him except that he could become very stubborn, and when in such a mood, he closed his mind completely to any reasoned argument. I encountered this condition very early in his administration. One afternoon, learning that the Minister had come into office, I grabbed some papers about which I needed to see him and went downstairs to his room. When I went in. he was engaged in an argument with Camillus Fernando, the Commissioner of Co-operative Development.

The Minister glanced at me as I entered, and continued with his disagreement with the Commissioner. I listened carefully to what was going on and realized that the Commissioner was right. The Minister wanted to dissolve the Board of Directors of a Multi-purpose Co-operative Society, and the Commissioner was rightly advising him that given the prevailing circumstances, and the legal provisions neither he nor the Minister had the power to do so. The Minister was not in agreement.

After sometime, the Minister turned to me and asked “Mr. Pieris, I am the Minister, don’t I have the power to dissolve this Board?” I said “I am afraid not, Sir.” This time turning away from the Commissioner, he started to argue with me. I kept on calmly and politely telling him about the limits of power which made the Minister only more irritated and angry. Finally, he gave an order to the Commissioner to dissolve the Board. The Commissioner and I warned him that if the Society went to the Supreme Court it could be most embarrassing.

The Minister however was quite exercised over the powers he thought he had. The Commissioner carried out the order, and the Society went to Court. In due course the judgment of the Supreme Court was prominently published in the newspapers. The Chief Justice Mr. Sharvananda slated the Minister for his “arbitrary” and “capricious” action. The judgment went on to cast severe strictures on him and concluded with an order to pay costs, and additionally a sum of Rs. 25,000 to be personally paid by the Minister.

On learning of the judgment, the Minister was greatly agitated. He called us and further wished to speak to the Attorney-General. We advised him that this would be a useless exercise. But he was adamant. We got the Attorney General on the phone for him. He advised the Minister firmly that he should pay up before the expiry of the given date or risk facing contempt charges. The Minister finally realized that there were indeed limits to the power of a Minister, and that the law in this respect had developed considerably towards curtailing wide executive powers, since he last held office a long time ago.

I managed to find Rs. 25,000 so that the Minister did not have to pay from his personal funds. After this episode, he listened to us much more, and on one celebrated occasion in the Parliamentary Consultative Committee, when I had to whisper words of caution into his ear, when he was once again giving certain directions to the Commissioner, he banged the table and said “Stop! My wise Permanent Secretary says I don’t have the power. I withdraw my order!”

Once the necessary adjustments were made in our working relationship with the Minister and he himself understood his operational framework better, in particular the legal aspects, it became quite pleasant to work with him. He was fatherly, and full of advice about good health habits, particularly diet and exercise. Old as he was, he was quite obviously one of the few MPs or Ministers who used Parliament’s well stocked library to the full.

He constantly carried with him a number of books on varied subjects and copies of the latest international magazines. He was well read and possessed a sound memory and could quote poetry extensively. On one occasion, to illustrate the point that perceptions differ depending on the circumstances one is placed in, he spontaneously quoted from memory, the following delightful lines from Kipling:

His previous training and experience as a good teacher showed. All this enlivened discussions with him. I was aware that during the early days, he was not happy with me and wanted to get another Secretary, which was actually my own suggestion to the President, when he discussed the setting up of the Ministry of Co-operatives with me. This was because duty compelled me to disagree with him in some instances. But as time went on he realized that my disagreements with him were not personal, but in the line of performing my duties.

Particularly after the Supreme Court judgment, referred to, he appreciated that the advice we gave him was sound. Once understanding and trust were established, he relaxed and we began to have a harmonious relationship. He appreciated good work and did not hesitate to commend such work. On one occasion, he wanted me to draft a memorandum to the Ministers of Co-operatives of the Provinces on the subject of “Devolution of Functions and Responsibilities in respect of the Co-operative Sectors to the Provincial Councils.” I drafted a four page memorandum and sent it to him for approval.

Two days later I received a hand written note from him on his Parliamentary letter head. It said, “Thank you very much for the memo to the Provincial Ministers. It is perfect, nothing missing, and nothing to add!” It was particularly satisfying to receive this from a Minister who was a member of the then State Council before I was born and one with whom, as I have related, I have had some disagreements. All this however was in the past and the relationship became warmer.

On one occasion when I was ill in bed with fever, the Minister unexpectedly came to see me at home. I remember my wife being worried about his climbing the stairs to my bedroom, because at his age he was not too firm on his feet. I was deeply touched. He sat at my bedside and talked to me for half an hour. He also paid me handsome compliments in Parliament, particularly during the Committee stage of the budget as well as on some other occasions when matters pertaining to the Ministry were under discussion.

For instance on July 20, 1988, he stated as follows in Parliament: “Then again the Co-operative Department and the Ministry officials have given me the fullest co-operation. The Co-operative movement has no greater friend than the Secretary to the Ministries of Food and Co-operatives Mr. Dharmasiri Pieris. He, with Mr. Gamani Jayasuriya was responsible for getting the Rs. 300 million loan in 1984. But for the timely intervention and help of Mr. Dharmasiri Pieris and Mr. Gamani Jayasuriya, the MPCS movement might have been underground by now.”

The Minister was here referring to a soft loan I negotiated with Mr. Chandi Chanmugam, Secretary to the Treasury, during this period. I am grateful that Chandi gave me a patient hearing and appreciated the critical condition the MPCS were in. I am also grateful for the confidence that Chandi had in me, for at the conclusion of our discussions he said “Millions of Rupees are being wasted. At least, I know that if this money is given to you, you would put it to good use.”

I indeed intended to put it to good use. In this, I was greatly assisted by Mr. Sunil Wijesinha, the well known Management Consultant, who at the time was Chairman of the Sri Lanka Institute of Co-operative Management, an organization coming under the Ministry. He succeeded in computerizing to a substantial extent the accounts of the MPCS. Therefore we had vital information readily available. We also did not just dole out money to the Co-operatives. We charged a low interest, and occasionally gave a grant when really necessary.

But all this was tied to their satisfying certain basic criteria laid down by us, which included specified good management practices and proper financial discipline. The computerization enabled us to closely monitor the Societies to which loans were given and I myself chaired a monthly meeting which went into matters such as the proper use of the loan, on schedule repayment and sound management practices.

If one received Rs. 300 million, one was certainly accountable to the country. But apart from that, which was in any case something I had to discharge in the line of duty, I felt personally responsible to Chandi Chanmugam, who did not argue or quibble, but promptly agreed to release the money, because of the confidence he had in me. As for Minister (Dahanayake) as well as Minister Gamani Jayasuriya, in spite of their own idiosyncrasies, they were experienced and mature politicians, and gentlemen.

If they felt that praise was due, they said it in public and did not mince words. They did not suffer from any inferiority complex that any praise bestowed on public officers, detracted from any perception of their own performance. They did not belong to that breed of lesser men often found in politics. They had the self confidence to praise others. Thus, on December 12, 1985, making the winding up speech on the Committee Stage of the Budget, on the debate on the votes of the Ministry of Food and Co-operatives, Hon. Gamani Jayasuriya said: “My Secretary and my Additional Secretary, have been of immense help to me. My Secretary has guided me in most of my work, and my duties as Minister of Food and Co-operatives have been made very much lighter because I have a Secretary of the calibre of Mr. Dharmasiri Pieris.”

Again, during the same occasion, this time, in the next year 1986, Hon. Gamani Jayasuriya said this in Parliament on December 18, when he referred to Mr. Weragoda, Secretary, Agriculture, and to me: “If I have some success in the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Food, it has been due to the good work done by my two Secretaries. They are gentlemen in whom I can place my utmost confidence. They are very hard working people. They did not work by the clock. They work till the job is finished.”

These degrees of modesty and gentlemaniness are increasingly difficult to find in a growing political environment where political light weights imagine themselves to be heavy weights and comically, if not tragically then believe themselves to be experts in omniscience. In such persons, there is little evidence of either dignity, generosity or maturity.

After Dr. Dahanayake left active politics and retired to his home in Galle, I sent him a New Year greetings card for 1990. He took the trouble to send me a touching letter in which he stated, “During all my career of 40 years, I had so many Secretaries, working with me. But from all these, the one who impressed me most was Dharmasiri Pieris.” After a fairly stormy start, this is how our relationship ended.

The lesson for public servants reading this is that you have to do the duty cast upon you whether it be pleasant or unpleasant. Seeking temporary popularity by seeking to compromise your position, if you strongly believe in it, and could cogently argue it, only demeans the public service and in the end diminishes your own standing in the eyes of the very politicians you are trying to please. I have myself seen numerous instances, where public servants, forgetting their public duty, sought to take short cuts to popularity and what in the end happened to them, the contempt with which they were treated, the fatal loss of credibility they suffered.

Trying to malign other public servants or attempting to falsely implicate them in something or other in the pursuit of personal gain, is also a dangerous game some public servants play which invariably end in disaster. I know of several such cases. But I shall cite only one example, in which I myself was indirectly involved, and where one such person, who feeling threatened that I might get some job that he was aspiring to, falsely told some influential members of a major political party that I had secretly helped to draft the election manifesto of the other major party.

Knowing my track record, and the unimpeachable credibility I had established, both in the service and outside, a senior member of the party concerned telephoned me in a veritable state of shock that someone could say this of me! The person went on to say that it was a very good thing that the public servant concerned had said this of me, because has led to the realization as to what “A dangerous character,” he was, and that they considered themselves fortunate that his “true character” was discovered, because they were indeed contemplating giving him a senior assignment.

My advice to all public servants is that the longest way round is the shortest way home. If you are tempted to take a short cut, then you must also face the prospect of your journey being cut short. What is necessary is to consistently, diligently and humbly work for your country and its people. Let praise or blame come as they may. I am an example where much unsolicited and unexpected praise had come my way, by doing just that. Instances I have mentioned in these memoirs are almost negligible compared to several files full of letters and references that I have with me.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobigraphy of MDD Pieris)

Trade courtships at ASEAN and the Geopolitics of Critical Minerals

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.