Jaffna Hindu College earns regional praise at AIA Healthiest Schools Competition

Jaffna Hindu College was named as one of the winners at the regional award ceremony of the prestigious AIA Healthiest Schools Competition, a flagship initiative by AIA Group aimed at promoting healthier habits among students across Asia-Pacific region through innovative school-based projects, an AIA news release said last week..

“The competition, which drew a record number of entries from eight regional markets, recognises schools that implement innovative and impactful initiatives in the areas of healthy eating, active living, mental wellbeing, and sustainability. Jaffna Hindu College stood out in the Active Lifestyles Award Category for its creative and community-focused project that introduced a bicycle rental system, ensuring greater access to physical activity for all students and encouraging healthier lifestyles across the region,” it said.

The winners of AIA Healthiest Schools programme were honoured at a vibrant regional awards ceremony in Da Nang, Vietnam, where the prize money was awarded to the respective schools to support the ongoing health and wellbeing initiatives.

The Cycling Club was introduced to make physical activity accessible and enjoyable for all students. The club introduced a bicycle rental system, managed via a custom software platform, ensuring equitable access regardless of financial background. Students participated in a cycle parade and three themed challenges focused on endurance, speed, and teamwork. The initiative quickly became popular, engaging over 100 students and receiving enthusiastic support from teachers, parents, and local businesses. Experienced cyclists from the community volunteered as coaches, while cycling organisations provided safety training and route planning.

“We believe that nurturing the wellbeing of our younger generation is key to building a healthier, longer, and better future for everyone. We are immensely proud of Jaffna Hindu College for winning the Active Lifestyles Award in the AIA Healthiest Schools Competition. Their inspiring initiative stands as a powerful example of how schools can foster healthier habits among students through meaningful community collaboration,” said Sasith Bambaradeniya, Chief Marketing Officer of AIA Sri Lanka.

This occasion marks a proud moment for Sri Lanka, as Jaffna Hindu College’s recognition on a regional platform reflects the remarkable ingenuity of the country’s youth and educators. It spotlights the growing emphasis within Sri Lanka on holistic education. It also positions Sri Lanka as a forward-thinking nation in terms of student health and wellbeing, inspiring other schools across the island to adopt similar transformative approaches, the release said.

The AIA Healthiest Schools Programme forms part of the AIA One Billion initiative, which aims to engage a billion people to live Healthier, Longer, Better Lives by 2030. As the first edition of AIA Healthiest School comes to a close, AIA remains committed to promoting the role of education in driving sustainable development and societal well-being.

The second phase of AIA Healthiest Schools is now open. To learn more, visit www.ahs.aia.com/lk.

David Pieris Group expands global footprint with investment in Dubai-based Navire Logistics

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.