President reviews progress on reform of 124 non-commercial State institutions

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake on Tuesday convened the Officials’ Committee to review progress on the implementation of the Cabinet decision concerning 124 non-commercial State institutions.

The meeting, held at the Presidential Secretariat, assessed the implementation of the Cabinet of Ministers-approved decision taken on 17 March 2025 to rationalise non-commercial State institutions and improve public sector efficiency.

The said Cabinet decision had directed a comprehensive review of these non-commercial State institutions under nine categories, citing concerns over outdated operations, inadequacy of vested powers, overlap of functions, and the potential for certain roles to be more efficiently handled by the private sector.

According to the President’s Media Division, the meeting focused on the current implementation status, challenges faced by specific State institutions, and measures needed to address them.

The responsibility of reporting the progress of implementing these decisions to the Cabinet of Ministers on a quarterly basis has also been entrusted to the above Officials’ Committee.

The Officials’ Committee, chaired by Secretary to the Prime Minister Pradeep Saputhanthri, is tasked with supervising the reforms and reporting progress quarterly to the Cabinet.

Chief of Presidential Staff Prabath Chandrakeerthi, Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Ministry Secretary Thilaka Jayasundara, Agriculture, Livestock, Land and Irrigation Ministry Secretary D.P. Wickramasinghe, Senior Additional Secretary to the President G.M.R.D. Aponsu, Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Local Government Ministry Additional Secretary – Internal Administration Hiransa Kaluthanthri, National Budget Department Director General Jude Nilukshan, Department of Public Enterprises Director General B.A.T. Rodrigo, and Additional Secretary to the Prime Minister and Committee Convener Sagarika Bogahawatte attended the meeting.