More about President Premadasa – his caring nature & lack of trust in people

President Premadasa was extremely hard working, meticulous in his approach to anything and displayed a tremendous capacity as well as desire to learn. This was evident to anyone who worked with him. There are many things one could relate regarding these aspects of his character. I would however, confine myself to just one. One day he called some of us to Sucharitha at about 7 p.m. in order to discuss some issues relating to education. That day, he appeared to be freer, more relaxed and ready to reminisce. He spoke of his school days, his teachers and other things.

When in this mood he was an excellent raconteur, and most interesting to listen to. There was a striking portrait of Mahatma Gandhi of India on the wall of his office room, where we were seated with him. It was a calm and serene portrait of the great leader, and in the course of his conversation that evening, the President related to us the story of how he happened to acquire it. He told us that once on a visit to Rashtrapathi Bhawan in India, he spotted this portrait on a wall, and he so admired it that the Indians gave him a copy of the painting, which was what we were discussing now.

In it, the painter had brought out in Mahatma Gandhi a particularly distinctive look. The President was now gazing at it, and he was keen to capture this look in words. We were also looking at it and trying to figure out the overwhelming impact of the portrait. What could the painter have represented? Many words were suggested, such as “Peace” “Tranquility” “Calm” and so on. But it was clear that these words did not capture the subtlety or the overall impact of the portrait. There was a certain spirituality in the face, which was quite riveting. The President was not satisfied. I too was gazing at it intently, muttering various words to myself and at one point, the word “Renunciation,” escaped from my lips.

The President, half heard it and immediately asked “What was that word Dharmasiri?” I said, “Renunciation.” “That’s the word!” he said. “That’s what it is.” Virtually on that note we parted. I had just reached home at about 9.30 p.m. when the telephone rang. It was the President. “What was that word you said?” he asked, and as I began to say “Renunciation,” he too remembered, and we both said it at the same time. This episode illustrated one of the many facets of an extremely complex personality, an outstanding characteristic of which was a desire to learn, and a constant alertness to its possibilities.

The issue of trust is also an important component of governance. To the extent that there could be an environment where such trust prevails, activities would proceed smoother and faster. If there prevails a mutual acceptance of the bona fides of the principal actors in government, both at the political and official levels, it would affect positively the quality and the working of the whole machinery of government. President Premadasa did not appear to be in that happy position. He was wary of people. Many told me that he trusted nobody. This of course did not bother me.

I went on the basis, that one stood or fell on the basis of one’s own record, and one’s own credibility, and that what others thought of you really did not matter. In situations and circumstances where you deal with hundreds, even thousands of people, at various levels, holding so many different, and in the case of some, even eccentric views, it would have been foolish in the extreme to have permitted oneself to be affected by all these.

My approach was to quickly decide whether a view was fair or valid. If it was not, and if it was important enough, you tried to convince the other party. If that didn’t work, you just moved on. You had so much to do, that it was impractical to permit yourself to be held hostage to any particular matter or thing. You indeed kept on working on the more important matters which were not prone to an immediate solution. But I was careful to see that preoccupation with time and distance did not detract from putting in the effort needed to achieve the here and now. The fact that there was an environment of mutual respect and trust between me and my senior colleagues in the public service smoothened the way considerably.

Apparently, the President did not seem to have been in the same happy position that I was. One day, in the course of a conversation when only both of us were there, he said “Dharmasiri, I don’t trust anybody.” We were discussing the reliability of some people for appointments. Then he went on to state why he doesn’t trust people. It had been based on considerable personal experience, and as an illustration he related the story of how he was trying for many months to rectify an erroneous decision of the Department of Inland Revenue about his income tax, at the time when he was just a Member of Parliament.

He had pursued it with the officials concerned and failing, had even gone to the Minister, because he felt deeply aggrieved. Nobody did anything. One day during the course of a casual conversation with a businessman, when this matter came up, the businessman had told him, “This is a small matter, Sir. I will get this attended to within two weeks.” Mr. Premadasa had not believed this, but had said nothing. A week thereafter, he happened to pass this businessman’s residence one evening, and thought that he would just drop in.

As he walked in unexpectedly, there was a flurry and a scurry, and he was just able to see the Assessor handling his case in the Inland Revenue Department darting into a room. He had pretended not to have seen it. As promised, the businessman had attended to his matter within two weeks. “What Ministers can’t do these people can” he said. The President said that he had had many such experiences and that is why he found it extremely difficult to trust any person. This was indeed a revealing story, which illustrated the strong impact of experience on people.

At the same time what would be important would be the degree of generality that each one elicits from one’s specific personal experiences. The whole issue of trust is not an abstraction. It concretely affects working relationships and even efficiency. My own view is that one has to take reasonable and calculated risks. You cannot perpetually go on the basis that you trusted nobody.

The year 1993 also started with a flurry of activities. There was the free school books and free school uniform distribution ceremony at Mirissa, followed on January 29 by the Presidential Mobile Service in Trincomalee. Early February demonstrated a very caring side of the President who was on the whole a very complex personality. This caring side would only have been known to a few people, if at all. I didn’t know it myself, until one morning, when getting ready to go to office, I bent down to put on my shoes. Something gave way in my back, and I was in severe pain unable even to straighten up.

With great difficulty and with the assistance of my wife I managed in due course to hobble into bed. The pain in the lower back was so severe that 1 could not even lift up my feet to stretch out in bed, without considerable assistance from my wife. I thought, I would be in hospital for weeks and had visions of lying in a hospital bed with the discomfort of one leg raised high in traction. We telephoned Dr. P.R. Anthonis, the eminent surgeon as well as a man of so many talents, who was my wife’s uncle and apart from any relationship, a good friend of mine, as well as my parents, even before the time of my marriage.

He said he would come immediately. In the meantime, I used the bedside telephone to speak to my Secretaries in office and to make arrangements for appropriate officials to handle my appointments for the day, including discussions with foreign visitors. On a matter of principle, I disliked postponing anything, unless the situation was totally impossible. Finally, I telephoned Mr. Wijayadasa, the President’s Secretary. He was concerned, because he himself had gone through this problem sometime earlier. He advised me to be very careful and strictly follow doctor’s advice, and added that he would put up a note to the President and keep him informed.

Dr. Anthonis arrived soon thereafter, checked me out, prescribed Voltaren which he in fact brought along with him, advised warm fomentation, etc., and wanted me to rest in bed. He promised to keep in touch with me. That evening, I got down several boxes of papers from office and propping myself up on pillows, and with the assistance of my Secretary and Personal Assistant attended to them. In my case this was a psychological necessity. If I didn’t attend to the papers I would not have been at ease.

Towards dinner time, which in our case is late, around 9.30 p.m. I was feeling more comfortable, although the pain was still very much there, and quite evident whenever I moved. I was still at my dinner when the telephone rang. It was close upon 10 p.m. We wondered who it could be, ringing up at this time. It was the President. “Aiyyo Dharmasiri, what happened?” Were his first words. I told him the problem and ended up by saying lightly, “Must be creeping old age, Sir.”

The President must have thought that I was treating the matter too casually. He proceeded to give me a lecture on the necessity of being very careful. He said that a similar thing happened to him sometime back, when he bent to wipe himself after taking a shower. He advised me to tell my wife to plug on the hair dryer and let the warm air play on my back, and to do this a few times a day. I was feeling slightly better, and made the mistake of telling him this, and saying that by morning if I felt still better, I intended going to office.

His affable manner changed immediately and in an icy tone, he said, “your coming to office is a secondary matter. What is important is to get completely well.” Then he asked me who was treating me. When I mentioned Dr. Anthonis’s name, he said “Dr. Anthonis is an excellent doctor. But he is a surgeon no? You must see a physician.” Then he inquired whether I knew his own physician. – Dr. H.H.R. Samarasinghe, the eminent consultant physician at Sri Jayewardenepura Hospital. I said that he was a good friend of mine. “Then telephone him now and ask him to come and see you tomorrow morning,” were the President’s parting words.

I thanked him sincerely for his kindness and concern. His interest was not pro-forma. His tone and manner as well as the time he spent talking to me indicated genuine concern. I got back to my dinner. I thought I would give Dr. Samarasinghe a call next day, mostly because, the President wanted me to, and he would have been very angry if he checked back and found that I had not done so. Five minutes later, the telephone rang again. My wife said, “Looks like you are not going to finish your dinner tonight.”

On the line was Dr. Samarasinghe. “Dharmasiri, what happened?” Were his opening words. “How do you know?” I inquired, just for the record although I knew what must have happened. “The President phoned me a short while ago,” he said. HHR would have come home and seen me as a friend. In fact, he came several times during my mother’s illness. But now the matter was official. He had a mandate from the President to see me next morning, examine me, and report to him, what my condition was! By 6.15 next morning, he was at home. He checked me out, asked me to continue with the same treatment as prescribed by Dr. Anthonis and insisted I remain three days in bed, with permission only to carefully walk to the bathroom and back.

He said, he was reporting this to the President. In three days, I was much better. He came and checked me out again, but advised another three days in bed. He was not going to encourage me to take any chances whatsoever. This was the second occasion that the President had demonstrated something special, in his approach towards me. The first was when he blindly signed a number of Cabinet Papers and Supplementary Estimates, put up by me, the first day he came to the Ministry after assuming office as Minister of Education and Higher Education. On that occasion, he flatly refused to read them or to be briefed about their contents. None of us knew, at the time of the episode I have related, that he had less than three months to live.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.