Lankan Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus visits India

A 19-member delegation of the Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus of Sri Lanka, led by Sri Lanka Women and Child Affairs Minister Saroja Savithri Paulraj visited India from 10 to 16 May. The delegation comprised of 15 Members of Parliament and four officials of the Parliament of Sri Lanka, including the Secretary General.

This marks the first-ever visit of the Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus of Sri Lanka to India. It was organised by the Parliamentary Research and Training Institute for Democracies (PRIDE) in collaboration with the External Affairs Ministry Government of India. The visit was in pursuance of the joint vision of Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi and Sri Lanka President Anura Kumara Dissanayake to deepen parliamentary cooperation and strengthen linkages between women leaders of India and Sri Lanka.

During the visit, the delegation called on Lok Sabha Speaker Shri Om Birla. Government of India Women and Child Development Minister Smt. Annapurna Devi also received the delegation. They also met Delhi Chief Minister Smt. Rekha Gupta. Discussions centred on fostering collaboration and exchanging best practices in areas of women-led development, gender equality, maternal and child welfare, care economy initiatives, and women’s leadership in politics and governance.

The delegation was provided comprehensive exposure to India’s governance models and focused initiatives in areas of women empowerment and child welfare, including through interactions with Delhi Police, Anganwadi workers, and Women Self-Help Groups. The role of Unique Digital Identity in inclusive service delivery was emphasised in a visit to the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI). FICCI Ladies Organisation (FLO) hosted the delegation for a roundtable interaction on the role of women as drivers of economic growth and innovation. In addition, PRIDE organised sessions on legislative processes, gender budgeting, system of Parliamentary Committees and other related matters between the two democracies.

As part of cultural immersion, the delegation visited the Taj Mahal in Agra. In New Delhi, they visited the India Gate and the War Memorial as well as The Light and The Lotus: Relics of the Awakened One Exhibit at the Rai Pithora Cultural Complex.

The visit reiterated the continued commitment of India and Sri Lanka to deepen parliamentary engagement and share developmental experiences. It further underscored the importance of women-led transformation and institutional collaboration in advancing inclusive and sustainable development in the two countries.