HNB Assurance welcomes Poornima as Non-Independent Non-Executive Director

HNB Assurance PLC is pleased to announce the appointment of Poornima Ranawaka as Non-Independent Non-Executive Director to its Board with effect from 01 October 2025.

Poornima Ranawaka is a distinguished Attorney-at-Law with nearly 19 years of legal practice and more than 22 years of experience across the banking, Insurance, finance, and education sectors. She holds extensive expertise in litigation, risk management, regulatory compliance, human resources, and recoveries. Over the years, she has held several senior leadership positions, including Deputy General Manager – Compliance and Legal at Axis Bank Sri Lanka, Head of Compliance at Pan Asia Banking Corporation and Allianz Insurance Lanka Limited, and Consumer Litigation Manager at Nations Trust Bank PLC.

She has been a trailblazer in her field, serving as Vice President and General Secretary of the Association of Compliance Officers of Banks, an Executive Member of the Risk Professionals Association, and a member of Sri Lanka’s FATCA advisory committee. She also represented the country during the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) evaluation in 2013. She is currently the General Secretary of the Alumni Association of Sri Lanka Law College.

She holds prestigious academic and professional qualifications, including First Class Honours from Sri Lanka Law College and an LL.M. in International Trade Law from the University of Wales. She has also completed a postgraduate diploma in International Compliance from the University of Manchester. Additionally, she is an Associate Member of the International Compliance Association (UK). Her contributions to the field have earned her honorary professorships in Law Teaching from IEMS, India (ACTD, USA).

Mrs. Ranawaka has fulfilled the requirements for her PhD in Management at Management and Science University (MSU), Malaysia, and is currently awaiting her convocation. She is deeply committed to education, served as a Commercial Law lecturer and the Chief Examiner at Sri Lanka Law College. In addition, she served as the Chairperson of the Curriculum Development Committee at Sri Lanka Law College from 2022 to 2024, playing a pivotal role in shaping and enhancing the institution’s academic framework. Her outstanding contributions to legal education were internationally recognized when she was awarded the prestigious International Achievers Award 2024 in India for her “Most Iconic Role in Law Teaching.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.