Ceylinco Life retains position as Sri Lanka’s most valuable insurance brand

Ceylinco Life has retained its position as Sri Lanka’s most valuable insurance brand in the 2026 Brand Finance ranking of the country’s 100 Most Valuable Brands.

Brand Finance has valued the Ceylinco Life brand at Rs. 6.7 billion and awarded it an AAA rating. In terms of brand value, Ceylinco Life is ranked 25th in the overall ‘Sri Lanka 100’ ranking.

The latest ranking builds on Ceylinco Life’s consistent performance in the Brand Finance rankings. In 2025, the Ceylinco Life brand was valued at Rs. 6.45 billion and awarded a Brand Rating of AAA-.

“Brand value is ultimately earned, not claimed, and this recognition tells us that Ceylinco Life continues to earn its place in the minds of Sri Lankans,” said Ceylinco Life Head of Marketing Dhiranjan Canagasabey.

“To be the country’s most valuable insurance brand is a powerful measure of the relevance and resilience of our brand. It reinforces our responsibility to keep raising the standard of what customers can expect from Ceylinco Life.”

“This recognition also underscores the strength of a brand that has consistently maintained its leadership of Sri Lanka’s insurance sector while building greater value and equity in the wider market,” he stressed.

Brand Finance evaluates brands using internationally recognised standards, combining measures of brand value with a comprehensive assessment of brand strength. Its evaluation considers factors including marketing investment, stakeholder equity and business performance.

Present in 27 countries, Brand Finance is the world’s first consultancy certified to provide ISO-compliant brand valuation and evaluation. It is also the first to produce reports compliant with both ISO 10668 and ISO 20671 standards. Founded in 1996, Brand Finance produces the annual Brand Finance Global 5000 brand valuation database.

Voted the ‘Peoples Life Insurance Service Provider of the Year’ for an unprecedented 20thconsecutive year at the 2026 SLIM Kantar Peoples Awards, Ceylinco Life has also been recognised as the Best Life Insurer in Sri Lanka by World Finance for 12 consecutive years.