Mahindra Ideal Finance records 204% growth in PBT to Rs. 477 mn for H1 FY26

Mahindra Ideal Finance Limited (MIFL) has delivered strong growth in income and profits during the six months ended 30th September 2025 (H1 FY26), fueled by a rapid expansion in its multi-brand vehicle financing portfolio.

Total Income for the period rose by 47% Year-on-Year (YoY) up to Rs. 1.85 billion, while Profit Before Tax (PBT) increased by 204% YoY to Rs. 477 million, and Profit After Tax (PAT) increased to Rs. 209 million reflecting growth of 374% YoY.

“Following the reopening of vehicle imports, coupled with the continued positive trends in economic stability in the country, we have seen a growing and steady demand for multi-brand vehicle financing across Sri Lanka. Together with a consistent focus on delivering consistent, personalized services for our vehicle importer and dealer partners, customers as well as disciplined management of credit quality and cost, we have delivered our best results on record in the first half of the current fiscal.

“Moving forward, we aim to maintain this momentum, and remain committed to delivering responsible, value-driven lending solutions enabling both our wholesale and retail customers to meet their aspirations,” MIFL Managing Director & CEO, Mufaddal Choonia said.

A notable highlight during the period in review was the company’s Total Asset base, which grew by 54% YoY to cross Rs. 22.1 billion, securing its position as a Medium sized finance company. The Company’s Loan Book grew by 84% YoY to Rs. 20.4 billion, supported by continued demand for retail lending and a measured expansion across key customer segments. The Cost-to-Income Ratio improved to 54% YoY, driven by improved operating efficiency.

Asset quality indicators recorded further improvement during the period. The Gross Stage 3 Ratio was 1.66 percent as at 30 September 2025, compared with 1.86 percent at the end of March 2025. The Company maintained a healthy Total Capital Adequacy Ratio of 18.1% compared to the required ratio of 12.5%.

Mahindra Ideal Finance Ltd. is a Central Bank of Sri Lanka-licensed non-bank financial institution (NBFI) and a subsidiary of Mahindra & Mahindra Financial Services Ltd, India. With a footprint of 37 branches and growing, MIFL offers a range of accessible, technology-enabled wholesale and retail financial solutions tailored to the needs of individuals, small businesses and multi-brand vehicle importers. The company is focused on supporting inclusive economic growth through practical, transparent and customer-centric lending products. With a rating of AA- (Outlook Stable) by Fitch Ratings, Mahindra Ideal Finance is one of the highest credit-rated financial institutions in Sri Lanka.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.