Parliament turns orange to end gender-based violence

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya says beyond law-making, a broader social responsibility and attention is required to eliminate gender-based violence

Women and Child Affairs Minister Saroja Savithri Paulraj states proposal will be handed over to Speaker to amend Standing Orders to prevent women MPs from being subjected to verbal or other forms of violence within Parliament

Supporting the “16 Days of Activism” to end gender-based violence, a series of programs were held on Monday within Parliament. Accordingly, badges symbolising the commitment to end gender-based violence were pinned onto Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya and Speaker Dr. Jagath Wickramaratne.

Expressing their support for today’s program, women Parliamentarians as well as male Parliamentarians, and members of the Parliamentary staff, arrived dressed in orange or orange-accented attire.

During this program organised by the Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus with the support of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), badges were also presented to the Deputy Speaker Dr. Rizvie Salih, Deputy Chairperson of Committees Hemali Weerasekara, Leader of the House Minister Bimal Rathnayake, Chief Government Whip Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa, and Chief Opposition Whip Gayantha Karunathilaka. In addition, the Secretary General of Parliament Kushani Rohanadeera, Chief of Staff and Deputy Secretary General Chaminda Kularatne, and Assistant Secretary General Hansa Abeyratne were also presented with badges.

Furthermore, at the Members’ entrance of Parliament, badges were presented to all Members of Parliament to express their support towards ending gender-based violence.

The 16 Days of Activism is an annual global campaign observed from 25 November to 10 December against Gender-Based Violence (GBV). It begins on the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women and culminates on Human Rights Day. The aim of this program is to raise awareness and strengthen action worldwide to prevent and eliminate violence against women and girls.

The 2025 Global Theme of the “16 Days of Activism” announced by the United Nations Secretary-General emphasises the message: “Let’s unite to end digital violence against all women and girls.”

A special media briefing was also held by the Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus.

Representing the Caucus Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya stated that this year’s theme calls for particular attention to be paid to ending violence occurring within digital spaces targeting women and girls. She further noted that beyond laws and policies, a broader social responsibility and attention is required to eradicate gender-based violence. She highlighted that the increase in the number of women representatives in Parliament to 22 this time is a positive development, and urged all parties, beyond political differences, to unite to eliminate gender-based violence across society.

Chair of the Caucus and Women and Child Affairs Minister Saroja Savithri Paulraj stated that 315 million women worldwide had been subjected to gender-based violence in 2024. She noted that this occurs in Sri Lanka as well, particularly within digital spaces, where incidents of harassment targeting women and female children, including in politics have increased significantly. Accordingly, the Caucus expects to submit a proposal to the Hon. Speaker to amend the Standing Orders to prevent women parliamentarians from facing verbal or other forms of harassment within Parliament. The Minister further stated that Parliament as an institution should set the first example to the country in eradicating gender-based violence. She invited everyone, regardless of political ideology, to unite in this cause.

Deputy Co- Chairperson of the Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus, Chamindranee Kiriella expressing her views, stated that according to a recent survey conducted by UNFPA and UN Women, individuals including women and girls frequently face various forms of online abuse. She said that 36.9% of such incidents involve the creation of fake identities, while 36.9% involve the distribution of obscene messages or videos. In Sri Lanka, one in every five women faces physical or verbal gender-based violence, she added, stressing that everyone must work together, beyond political differences, to change this situation and build a better society. She also extended her appreciation to UNFPA for collaborating in implementing this program within the Parliament of Sri Lanka.