EDB invites German business leaders to Sri Lanka Expo 2026

A high-level business promotion program held on 27 February 2026 in Bremen brought together major trade chambers, business associations, and prominent German companies, providing an opportunity to further strengthen bilateral relations between Sri Lanka and Germany, explore prospects in the German market, and promote Sri Lanka Expo 2026 as a key international trade event.

At the invitation of OAV Bremen and the Bremen Chamber of Commerce and Industry (IHK Bremen), Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Minister Vijitha Herath and EDB Chairman and CEO Mangala Wijesinghe attended the program and its associated series of business meetings, coordinated by the Embassy of Sri Lanka in Berlin.

During the visit, the EDB Chairman held discussions with representatives of the Bremen Chamber of Commerce and Industry, led by its President André Grobien alongside Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Germany Waruni Muthukumarana, Minister Counsellor Senuja Samaraweera and Counsellor and Head of Chancery at the Embassy of Sri Lanka in Berlin Thivanka Athuraliya. The discussions focused on enhancing Sri Lanka’s export and investment prospects, highlighting the country’s strategic advantages, including its transshipment capabilities and advanced port infrastructure.

Wijesinghe extended an official invitation to the President of IHK Bremen to lead a business delegation to Sri Lanka Expo 2026 to be held in 18-21 June 2026, which was positively received. Both parties further agreed to continue engagement through a virtual follow-up meeting.

A business roundtable was also held at IHK Bremen, attended by board members of IHK Bremen and OAV Bremen, along with representatives of the German business community. The Sri Lankan delegation shared insights on the country’s economic landscape, investment opportunities, tourism potential, and skilled workforce. German participants showed particular interest in exploring opportunities in Sri Lanka’s logistics sector.

The EDB Chairman made a detailed presentation on Sri Lanka Expo 2026, encouraging German businesses to actively participate in the event.

In a separate meeting with Mayor of Bremen Andreas Bovenschulte, both parties shared views on potential collaborations in key sectors such as automotive, trade, and logistics, as well as expanding cooperation in tourism between the two countries. Further high-level discussions were held with Federal Foreign Minister of Germany Johann Wadephul, where the two sides sides explored avenues to strengthen bilateral relations, enhance trade and investment flows, and deepen cooperation within the framework of the European Union (EU).

The event concluded with the Sri Lankan delegation attending the 125th anniversary celebrations of the OAV Bremen Chapter at Bremen Town Hall. The Minister participated as the Guest of Honour and keynote speaker from Asia alongside Federal Foreign Minister of Germany Dr. Johann Wadephul. The event was attended by around 350 distinguished guests.

The EDB utilised the occasion to engage with German business leaders, address trade-related inquiries, promote Sri Lanka Expo 2026 and strengthen networks with German business organisations, paving the way for enhanced future collaboration.