Concentric AI joins forces as Strategic Partner for 2nd Data Privacy and Protection Summit

CICRA Group Director/CEO Boshan Dayaratne (right) with Orin Corporation Chief Operating Officer Rehan Ariyaratne – Pic by Sameera Wijesinghe

The 2nd Data Privacy and Protection Summit 2026, organised by the Daily FT and CICRA scheduled for 23 July 2026 at the Oak Room, Cinnamon Grand, is set to be the foremost gathering for data protection professionals, legal experts, and technology leaders in the country.

As data breaches grow more sophisticated, AI enablement takes center stage, and the enforcement of Sri Lanka’s Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA) draws nearer, this summit provides a vital platform to understand the evolving landscape of privacy, security, and compliance.

In a major development, Concentric AI, in partnership with local technology leader Orin Corporation, has come on board as the Strategic Partner for this year’s summit. Concentric AI is an advanced, AI-driven data security platform that autonomously discovers, classifies, and protects sensitive business data across cloud and on-premises environments, fast growing to be one of the leaders in AI Data Security and Governance. Orin Corporation, a trusted name in the local tech landscape, was a Strategic Partner during the inaugural Data Privacy and Protection Summit in 2025. Their continued collaboration with CICRA and DFT underscores a long-term commitment to elevating data protection standards in the region.

CICRA Group Director/CEO Boshan Dayaratne said: “We thank Orin Corporation for their unwavering trust in CICRA and DFT for the second successful year of partnership,” said Dayaratne. “Today, AI-driven solutions are key factors in defending against cyber attacks. Humans cannot defend against AI-driven attacks without the support of AI. While attackers use AI, defenders must also evolve their AI to fight back. We invite everyone to attend the Summit on 23rd July to understand how organizations and Data Controllers can achieve PDPA compliance, especially as enforcement is soon approaching.”

Orin Corporation Chief Operating Officer Rehan Ariyaratne said: “Our contribution to this year’s summit goes beyond technology, it’s about empowering local businesses to stay ahead of the threat curve. By bringing Concentric AI to the forefront, we aim to demonstrate how we will protect our organisations key asset, data, in a world that is enabling and using AI at an ever growing pace. Participants at the summit will gain hands-on insights into deploying AI to defend against AI-powered threats, reduce data security threat surfaces, understand real world use cases of data risk management in an AI driven world, and walk away with actionable strategies to build a resilient, PDPA-ready compliance framework.”

Both Government institutions and private sector organisations have a shared responsibility in protecting citizen and customer data. With PDPA enforcement imminent, public sector data controllers and private enterprises alike must act now to avoid penalties, reputational damage, and security breaches. This summit offers a unique opportunity to learn from global AI-driven solutions like Concentric AI, understand regulatory obligations, and build a proactive defense strategy.