US-Israeli War On Iran; Set Ablaze Gulf Countries

On Saturday 28 February  2026  United States’ lawless President Donald Trump has fulfilled long standing Israeli dream by launching a joint US-Israeli military strike on  Iran which refused to bow down to Israel in the way Arab dictators had done.

President Donald Trump said that U.S seeks to eliminate Iran’s nuclear and missile programs, destroy the country’s navy, and change its leadership. Perhaps blackmailed  (Epstein files) by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, declared war criminal by the International Court of Justice, Trump installed in power by Zionist billionaire Jewish  lobby, launched this military strikes in violation of all international laws.

It was also not approved by US Congress which is essential to declare war on other countries. Within hours they killed more than 153 girls in a school in Tehran.

In the process Trump and Netanyahu also killed Iranian President Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and his family members. Religious leader Ayatollah Khameni is not an ordinary person. Iranians  with a proud history of 7000 years behind them will never forgive this crime. It is matter of weeks and months before Trump and Netanyahu learn their lessons for committing this heinous crime.

Iran named Ayatollah Alireza Arafi to its interim leadership council on Sunday, which will be at the helm of the country after the supreme leader’s killing. The interim council, which will also include the President and the head of the judiciary, will lead the country until the Assembly of Experts “elects a permanent leader  ”.

President Masoud Pezeshkian said the new leadership council “has begun its work” even as Iran fired missiles at targets in Israel and Gulf Arab states after vowing massive retaliation.

Trump also tricked Iranians by calling for talks on nuclear program.

Denouncing the military strikes Oman foreign minister Badr bin Hamad Al Busaidi, one of the main mediators in the talks between Iran and the Trump administration, said  Washington was duped into war by the Israelis, as a nuclear deal was within reach. He added this is not Washington’ war.

Iran does not have nuclear weapons. Israel has around 400 nuclear bombs. Iran abide by UN nuclear non proliferation treaty    where as Israel has not subjected its nuclear facilities for UN inspection.

On July 14, 2015, after years of extensive diplomacy, Iran and the P5 countries plus Germany concluded the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) to ensure that Iran’s nuclear program would remain exclusively peaceful. In return, economic sanctions on Iran were to be lifted. The JCPOA placed Iran’s nuclear activities under strict and continuous scrutiny by the International Atomic Energy Agency and thereby ended the risk of a nuclear-arms breakout by Iran, a risk that Iran had consistently denied.

Ever since the Islamic Revolution led by Ayatollah Ruhollh Khemoni overthrew the corrupt US stooge Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi  dynasty in 1979, Israel and its partners in crime in US-UK and Europe vowed to over this regime .

The new Islamic regime adopted a fiercely independent policy opposing  US-led western conspiracies. The US-UK-Europe and Israel together with their Arab partners subjected Iran to immense hardships by imposing economic sanctions and  launching military strikes besides accusing Iran of terrorism which is the product of US led west to justify their wars on  Muslim countries.

The Arab dictators openly and secretly sided with Israel and  US led west against Iran causing untold hardships.However despite all the sufferings Iran continued its policy. for  the past 48 years.

In the midst  Israel and the US led west ,were hell bent on overthrowing this regime and install in power Reza Pahlavi, the eldest son of the former Shah. Since his father’s death in 1980, Reza Pahlavi has lived in exile, primarily in the United States and  maintained close ties with U.S. officials and  positioned himself as a “catalyst” for a transition. Pahlavi maintained close ties with Israel .

It was under this circumstance US-Israeli plotters organized anti-government protest in Iran. In the midst came the US-Israeli military strikes triggering immediate Iranian retaliation across the Middle East. Explosions were reported in Tehran and other major cities while Iran responded with missile attacks toward Israel and US military bases in Gulf countries such as Saudi Aabia,Qatar,Bahrain ,UAE and Kuwait.

In his blistering critique of the US–Israel military strikes on Iran renowned economist and geopolitical commentator Jeffrey Sachs, Professor at Columbia University said  “the attacks have nothing to do with nuclear threats. Instead it is an imperial war aimed at sustaining US–Israeli hegemony and controlling Middle Eastern oil. He accused Trump of acting at the behest of Benjamin Netanyahu, warning that the world is being pushed toward a wider global conflict.

Columnist Hamid  Dabashi said Trump-Netanyahu war aims to entrap Iranians into unconditional submission. The offensive intends to cause civil war in Iran on the model of Syria and Libya, with millions forced to flee their country .

Trump said the operation was intended to devastate Iran’s military, eliminate its nuclear programme and bring about a change in its government.  The first factor is the unleashed power of the US military with Trump, an unhinged commander-in-chief eager and willing to distract attention from his domestic (Epstein files), regional (adventurism in Venezuela, Cuba and Greenland) and global (China and Russia) fiascos. He habitually lied when he staged a false negotiation with the Iranians to buy time to have enough military buildup to strike Iran effectively.

Israel, the most lethal killing machine in the region, fresh from its merciless slaughter of tens of thousands of Palestinians, military strikes against Lebanon, Syria, Yemen and Iran back in June 2025.

Israel has multiple interests in this latest round of its relentless warmongering: distract attention from the global condemnation of its genocide and crimes against humanity in Palestine, and expand its garrison state to gobble up the entirety of Palestine and parts of Lebanon and Syria and perhaps farther.

The US ambassador to Israel, Mike Huckabee, has just given it the green light to conquer the entire Middle East. Equally important on Israel’s agenda is the fragmentation of Iran into ethnic enclaves.

Israel will not be satisfied with the total fragmentation and destruction of Iran. Turkey and Pakistan are also on its targeted radar. India’s violently anti Muslim Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government is a willing partner with Israel in all its crimes.

The US-Israel war on Iran is not to liberate Iranians from their rulers. It is to entrap and slave them into unconditional submission to their colonial and imperial conquest of the entire region.

Jeane J Kirkpatrick, Senior fellow for national studies at the Council of Foreign relations said “It is easy to start a war.Its very hard to end one successfully .Iranins are proud  of their more than 7000 year old history and heritage. They will not bow down to US-Israeli threats.This is a lesson that President George W Bush learnt in Iraq and Afghanistan- and previous presidents before him, in places ranging from Vietnam to Somalia. It is a lesson that President Donald Trump is likely to learn anew in Iran”

Anticipating his death, in a pre recorded message to Arab dictators who have abandoned Islam and Muslims and hob knob with enemies of Islam President Ayatollah Khamenei said  “It is better to live one day with dignity than living a whole life in humiliation serving the sworn enemies.

Next few days, weeks and months will show who the Iranians are.