Sri Lanka find right combination in WI defeat

June.18 (Mirror Sports) - West Indies sealed the three-match T20 series (2-1) with a thrilling victory in the last game over Sri Lanka where the visitors were beaten in the final over.

Sri Lanka were in control for a major part of the game until their spearhead Dushmantha Chameera gifted away the game bowling low full tosses one after another with West Indies middle-order duo Rovman Powell and Sherfane Rutherford sending them all out of the park.

Chameera ended up conceding 64 runs in his four overs with Jason Holder smashing three sixes in his last over. Chameera produced a match-winning performance in the second game where he took 3 wickets for 9 runs, but it would be fair to say he singlehandedly destroyed Sri Lanka in the last game.

Sri Lanka’s ground fielding also didn’t help the cause as Rutherford was put down twice before he smashed a cracking half century. It was Eshan Malinga who dropped him first off his own bowling early on Rutherford’s innings and then former captain Dasun Shanka couldn’t hold on to a straightforward catch at long off later on.

The destructive left handed batsman made Sri Lanka pay for their mistakes clinching the series.  Despite the defeat Sri Lanka should take confidence in the way some of their players performed in this series. Especially, Kamil Mishara who had lost his spot made a good comeback while Maheesh Theekshana who struggled a bit in recent times clearly solidified his spot in the team.

A lot has been said about team combinations especially after the defeat in the first game where Sri Lanka had to play Wanindu Hasaranga at number 7 with a very long tail to follow.

However, the team did look so much better when Wellalage came into the side to strengthen batting and give that spin option.  Pavan Ratnayake batting at number 4 had a series to forget. He was absolutely awful, but there is no doubt that he should remain in the side and bat at 4 moving forward.

Looking at the options Sri Lanka has, the only player who could dislodge him from the team is Janith Liyange because he does give a bit of option with his medium paces as well, but right now he doesn’t seem to be in Sri Lanka’s plans for shorter format.

Their combination most certainly got better with Wellalage, but he has to bat at least number 5. Sri Lanka seemed to have taken a very aggressive batting approach under coach Kirsten especially with the way Kamindu Mendis and Dasun Shanka have gone about their business. Ideally batting at number 5 or 6, you’d like them to finish the innings off but they haven’t always been able to do that which leaves players like Wellalage and Wanindu Hasaranga bat over 6-7 overs knowing they haven’t got much batting to follow.

Perhaps Sri Lanka should consider promoting Dunith Wellalage up to number 5 or use Wanindu Hasaranga as a floater leaving either Kamindu Mendis or Dasun Shanka to bat at 7. That’ll give the top order some more freedom as well.