SL-Canada Business Council reaffirms commitment to strengthen bilateral relations

The Sri Lanka-Canada Business Council of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, which recently convened its 35th Annual General Meeting (AGM) at the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, reaffirmed its commitment to promoting bilateral trade and investment, facilitating business linkages and strengthening private-sector cooperation between Sri Lanka and Canada, while continuing to support the interests and objectives of its membership.

The AGM brought together the council members, office bearers and distinguished stakeholders to review the council’s activities during the past year and set its direction for the year ahead.

It was attended by High Commissioner of Canada to Sri Lanka and Maldives Isabelle Martin, together with the members of the council, office bearers and distinguished invitees.

At the AGM, Spillburg Holdings (Pvt.) Ltd Managing Director Mohamad Hameez was re-elected as President of the council for the 2026/2027 term. Global Academy of Further Education Managing Director M. Irshad Razack was re-elected as Senior Vice President, while Acentura Inc. Associate Vice President Pemith Paaris was appointed as Vice President. Hiran De Silva of Asian Institute of Business and Science (Pvt.) Ltd was re-elected as Treasurer.

The Executive Committee for 2026/2027 was also appointed, comprising representatives from Aitken Spence Travels (Pvt.) Ltd, Aspect Trading (Pvt.) Ltd, BOV Capital (Pvt.) Ltd, ECD Holidays (Pvt.) Ltd, Fab Foods (Pvt.) Ltd, Hatton National Bank PLC, Maliban Biscuit Manufactories (Pvt.) Ltd, Marlbo Trading Company, MWAY (Pvt.) Ltd and Ningbo Marketing Company (Pvt.) Ltd.

In addition, a dedicated subcommittee was appointed to oversee the initiatives relating to membership development, women entrepreneurship and corporate social responsibility.

Recognising the valuable contributions made towards the council’s activities, Lionel Silva and Jay Ong will continue to serve as Honorary Members of the council.

The council also announced the appointment of Kala Amirthalingam as Honorary Goodwill Ambassador for Women and Child Development and Empowerment.

The post-business session featured an address by Martin, who emphasised the importance of continued engagement and cooperation between the business communities of Sri Lanka and Canada.

A keynote presentation was delivered by University of Kelaniya Social Sciences Faculty International Studies Department Senior Lecturer Dr. George I.H. Cooke on ‘Canada-Lanka Economic Relations in a Changing Global Order: Opportunities for Business, Investment and Trade’.

The presentation examined the evolving global economic landscape and highlighted the potential opportunities for enhanced bilateral trade, investment and business cooperation between Sri Lanka and Canada.