Thomian cricketers in Cricketing Hurrah at the SSC in Colombo, December 17, 2023

The historic lunch of Thomian cricketing legends held at the SSC in Colombo on December 17, 2023 was hosted by the Rudra brothers of whom Ravi Rudra residing in New Zealand is a livewire who has reminisced a lot on athletics and cricket recently. His research is praiseworthy.

Of those who attended the lunch the Tissera brothers were the oldest. Vernon Tissera opened batting for STC in 1949, and at 90 years was a delight to have with us. I was invited to speak, and mentioned that I entered STC in 1954, after two enchanting years at Ladies College, not to mention a few naughty stories I related.

Michael Tissera had been there too, six years ahead of me, and was quick to say that he too had had a splendid experience with the girls. In 1954, at the age of eight years, I watched the Royal-Thomian encounter for the first time. It was played at the Colombo Oval, and I was seated next to my two sisters and father.

Suddenly the tent erupted in a chorus of cheers with girls screaming, “come on Michael, come on little Michael;” and my little eyes picked a small Burgher boy walking out to bat. I asked my sister why, all of a sudden, the girls in the tent had gone crazy, and was told that the little chap who was walking out to bat was their former classmate whom they loved very much. The little Michael warmed the hearts of all with a polished display of batting, missing a half century in his debut by just two runs.

In the 1950s, spectators filled the covered pavilion of the Oval, and no more. The opposite side of the ground was empty, and near the gate on the far side was a small open enclosure which was then known as the free tent. I recalled fond memories of Ronald Reid making a record breaking unbroken 158 runs in 1956, and two additional magnificent innings in the following year. He was a batsman who never attempted a lofted shot, and his forte was his ability to pick the gaps and take singles.

I also recalled the glorious batting of Ajith Jayasekera and David Ponniah who in 1967, made 75 and 100 not out respectively in an opening stand of 118 runs. Jayasekara, in particular, was devastating and was unfortunately run out when he was well on his way to a century, and David Ponniah was lucky to get his century when the catch he offered at 99, was spilt. In the same match Azam Hameed made a classy innings of 59 not out.

In the years I played, Sarath Seneviratne made 97 and 98 and is probably the most unlucky batsman of the series, to have missed a century in successive years by such a narrow margin. Anura Tennekoon’s innings of 78 and 40 were classy knocks and in 1967, the left hander, Sriantha Rajapakse, threw caution to the winds, when making a blistering century. I also spoke of the record-breaking innings of 184 made by Duleep Mendis in 1972, which arguably is the greatest schoolboy innings played at the Colombo Oval.

I also recalled a little bit of Royal-Thomian memories I had heard from my late father, Henry Ashmore Pieris, who was last man to bat in the 1923 Royal-Thomian encounter. With 40 minutes left and with defeat staring, he had walked in to join the Thomian star batsman, Rudolph Jayetilleke. The match was being played at the SSC grounds at Victoria Park, and when what appeared to be the last over had been stoutly defended by my father, and the large clock showed 6.00 pm, the umpire Douglas de Saram (Thomian) had looked at his watch and had declared one more over, and Rudolph Jayetilleke at 40 was to face it. Cecil Dias the Royal skipper decided to bowl this last over and the third ball was a full toss which Jayetilleke had hit back to the bowler, and the Thomians lost the match. This is considered to be the most exciting finish of the series as it is the only match decided in the last over.

Another story I related was what my grandfather, Henry Ashmore Pieris senior, had related to my father. The match was the 1885 encounter known as the nine run match. My grandfather, then 24 years, was yet a schoolboy at STC, Mutwal. It was a time when some schoolboys were young men; and were allowed to remain in school and educate themselves more until they found a job, as there were no universities to enter.

My grandfather had watched the nine-run match, played at Galle Face, and his copy of the 1885 College Magazine is with me. My grandfather had mentioned that on the second day there was torrential rain and, although the water on the outfield had dried up due to the sandy soil, the pitch itself, which was uncovered, was clearly unfit for play, although the umpires had decided to resume play.

In the meanwhile two or three Royalists had gone missing and the Royal captain had not taken the field as he had no team to lead in. It was not a case of the Royal skipper being unsporty, but he had no team to walk out onto the field. The next morning the three Royalists who were missing had been spotted in Kandy.

There will never be another nine run match as wickets are now covered and pitches are so much better to bat on. The Royal-Thomian match then started at 2.30 pm in the afternoon, and later started after lunch at 12 noon. In the 1960s not only did the Oval fill up all around (schoolboys in both schools had increased greatly), the game too started at 11 am with a lunch break. Since the centenary encounter of 1979, the Royal-Thomian match is a three-day fixture, played at the SSC grounds at Maitland Place.

In two day matches cricket was played with different values. A more positive approach was witnessed with both teams not resorting to time wasting tactics. At least 20 overs were bowled per hour, and in the years prior to the Great War, opening bowlers were spinners and bowlers did not have long run-ups. Captains made bold declarations and matches were kept alive. The game of cricket of today is very different in all aspects, and no comparisons can be drawn meaningfully.

There have been so many Thomian cricketers who have shone over the years and many of them have crossed the great divide.

All those present at this historic lunch were grateful to the Rudra brothers for their wonderful hospitality. One thing is certain: all who were at the lunch would never forget the event.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.