Fast-Paced Online Education In Sri Lanka: A Boon Or Bane

In an era where online education has become a cornerstone for professional and personal growth, the power of online teaching and learning inter-alia stands out as a beacon of innovation, accessibility, and lifelong education. With the shift from traditional/virtual classroom settings to online platforms, the landscape of online education has undergone a profound change for the better, and continues to inspire a revolutionary change, offering unprecedented opportunities to learners across the globe. From highlighting the essence of online education, its role in learning, and the power of lifelong education to addressing the challenges and opportunities it presents, this article aims to inspire educators and learners alike, to embrace the online education journey. It underscores the significance of adapting to new modes of thinking, the importance of engagement and innovation in online education, and the bright future that lies ahead in leveraging technology to enhance online teaching and learning experiences.

In the wake of the 2020 pandemic, the students were the most impacted and the hardest hit. Of course, when the situation scrolled back to normalcy after 2-years of stagnation and disruption to formal education, a section of students and parents found themselves completely disoriented with legitimate apprehensions on the well-being of students, especially in regard to potential health hazards, risks and safety issues within the formal class-room setting. Suffice it to say, the fear-psychosis among sections of students and parents, inter-alia prompted stakeholders to initiate a novel concept of education, namely switching to online mode of education as an alternative to formal education across the board.

Post-pandemic online education trends have been largely complimentary in the wake of high-tech products and services being introduced by global tech giants, in facilitating tech-savvy online-users embracing and adapting themselves to novel online modes of education, while doing away with hitherto-prevalent formal modes of schooling. Indeed, online education has paid off well-and-truly, in transforming education services to online mode slowly but surely, marked by a steady progression, and paradigm shift. In so doing, the tech authorities spared no time, and acted swiftly in the best interests of all stake-holders in the field of education, in facilitating a smooth and hassle-free transition from school-mode to online-mode across the world, including Sri Lanka.

The Inception of Online Education in Sri Lanka: A Trend Setter

Being worst hit by pandemic, and already reeling from financial bankruptcy in 2021/22, Sri Lanka had to reinvent the wheel, and put up with austerity measures dictated to by the IMF and lending partners, in charting its own course at significant odds, inter-alia, marked the inception/birth of the online education for the first time in the country’s history. Sri Lanka’s transition through pandemic is indeed unique, characterized by a successful diversification of its education sector from a totality of formal education to a mix of both formal and online modes, thereby catering to students opting for online mode of education. Online education represents a fair share of private online schools and virtual online courses catering to all grades and ages; from primary to secondary, higher education, undergraduate to postgraduate academic programs, diplomas. etc.

To my knowledge, online education institutions operating in Sri Lanka do not necessarily come under the scrutiny of any government authority, unlike in the case of private schools and institutes including international schools, which ought to strictly abide by the rules and regulations of the Ministry of Education and Higher Education, allied departments and agencies come under the ministry. Be that as it may, online education institutions and their academic courses must be on par with International Organization for Standardization (ISO) rules & regulations, and, at the same time, must operate and maintain with utmost transparency and accountability in accordance with the terms & conditions stipulated by the International Curriculum Association (ICA) as applicable to all such entities.

Phenomenal Growth and Success in Online Education: A Game Changer

The emergence of the online education landscape in the post-pandemic era could be regarded as a “Game Changer”, which continues to make ripples across the world with astounding success. Online education world-wide today accounts for nearly 5% share of the education sector in its entirety. Over the last several years, online education has recorded a phenomenal growth in real terms, registering an all-time-high; encompassing all segments, inter-alia, from kindergarten to secondary, and graduate to post-graduate, and beyond. Going by the popular proverb “Every cloud has a silver lining”, it is no doubt that on-line education has opened new vistas of opportunities for those in pursuit of online education as a career, and for others looking for novel opportunities for income generation in this day and age.

Simply put, online education has been mutually beneficial, and mutually rewarding for people with innovative, entrepreneurial and ambitious minds, capable of multitasking, and willing to face challenges with resilience, faith and determination. Among them, there are those who seldom give up, hold their breath in sheer steadfastness and courage, and are destined to prevail at the greatest of odds. They are sure to survive under any circumstances no matter what comes against their way. They are fearless, and not scared of death, dare to face challenges in dreadful and perilous situations, yet often end up victorious, in what could be termed as a “game-changer”.

It’s worth taking stock of Sri Lanka’s online education landscape. If I may elaborate further, the online education sector perhaps is the single-most-dynamic venture that has evolved and stood the test of times since 2020-pandemic, despite the country’s severe economic doldrums. In fairness to all, online education has thrived, and continues to make headway as a progressive alternative to formal school education. Sri Lanka’s online education sector has recorded an impressive growth and market penetration of around 5%, which is widely considered an overwhelming success, surpassing its South Asian counterparts. The country’s success story in online education, by and large stems from its inherent strengths, and competitive edge and advantage over formal education, which appeared to have outlived its purpose, rationale and spirit.

Sri Lanka’s virtual education today remains a force to reckon with, among students and parents alike, and is poised to grow exponentially in view of the sector’s resilience, popularity and comparative advantage as opposed to formal education. To its credit, online education has progressed seamlessly, and well-and-truly, reaching its optimum potential, and continues to make inroads into the formal education sector, thus catering to students from different walks of life and social strata within and without the country. Of late, mush-rooming of online education institutions in Sri Lanka has been a major cause for concern among industry stakeholders due to a myriad of reasons. Noteworthy of them include, apprehensions over quality assurances viz-a-viz course curriculum, subjects, staff, demand & supply, market saturation, unfair pricing, tuition fees, facilities, access to foreign universities, eligibility requirements and whatnot, to name a few.

My recollection of the children’s mood and the nation’s status-quo during the pandemic was one of somber, and precariously on the very edge of being broken, characterized by persistent anxiety, socio-economic insecurity, and chronic over-alertness. The somber demeanor and loss of spirited childhood qualities among Generation Z and Generation Alpha stem from overlapping crises, including pandemic-related social isolation, coercion, economic uncertainty and pervasive use of digital devices that often replace interpersonal connections. This sordid environment has heavily impacted their mental well-being and altered their reading and communication habits. A good majority of our children today look “distressed, depressed and hard-pressed”, often confronted with strong temptations including digital over-indulgence, peer pressure, and academic or behavioral issues etc.

The status-quo in the post-pandemic era had taken a turn for the worse, making them “restless, thoughtless and speechless”, much to the consternation and bewilderment of their parents. The youth, who were seen as carefree, with fewer pressures and expectations on the other hand, have succumbed to, and bore the brunt of post-pandemic vagaries and unforeseen circumstances. They eventually had to give-in, and adapt themselves to face the realities of times, amidst ever-growing concerns and uncertainties. In general, youth today are feeling frustrated, and confronted with an uncertain future and destiny, being left with little alternatives. To make matters worse, they are overwhelmingly obsessed with titles, statuses, trophies, recognition, wealth and materialism, inter-alia, hard-pressed by socio-economic woes, cosmopolitan life-styles and social media savvy status-quo of the youth.

It is highly unfair and hypocritical to expect children to avoid social media when their primary role models, namely parents alike, are deeply hooked, and immersed in social media platforms. In particular, social media frenzy among youth is often characterized by intense, highly reactive and obsessive online behavior that frequently sweeps through young demographics, heavily driven by the pursuit of likes, virality, and the fear of missing out. It is a widespread trend and illusion prevalent, especially among Gen Z in the wake of social media’s emergence, such as Facebook, Instagram, TikTok,, to the point of making them vulnerable, albeit showing highly introverted behavioral problems, neglecting their studies and family commitments, more often than not. Driven by personal instincts, traits and social media-hype/habits, this hyper-connectivity correlates with diminished attention spans, noticeable increase in screen addiction, regular sleep deprivation, and escalating mental health challenges.

On the other hand, global tech companies and conglomerates are constantly looking for ways to capitalize on the unpredictable social media hype among youth by using targeted media stunts and marketing strategies in ways that appeal to youth. In fact that raises a pertinent question, whether countries if at all would have the wherewithal and resources to tackle the social media fallout on the youth on their own, at a time when most tech companies aim at doing the exact opposite. It is commonplace today that both children and parents live in a virtual world of delusion and fantasy. Unfortunately the parents too tend to forget the fact that they are supposed to be role models for children; alas, who oftentimes appeared to be on the social media belittling their children over their primary responsibilities. A recent case study conducted by a think tank on the impact of social media and online platforms, has drawn parallels between the social media addiction and drug addiction which prove the social media’s adverse impact on children, their well-being and morality and social ethics.

Transition from Formal Education to Online Mode: Challenges & Concerns

Amidst all the doom and gloom, people who lived through such turbulent times had pinned their hopes on a post-pandemic new world order. They drew inspiration from the lessons learnt, knowledge acquired and experience gained while rekindling aspirations to usher in a safer and more harmonious world for all. Though countries emerged with renewed vigor after months of abyss and isolation, not all of them did prosper and realign themselves with the evolving geo-political dynamics, trends and momentum amidst growing public apathy, concerns and complacency. Against this backdrop, countries impacted by the pandemic, inter-alia struggled and pursued their own ambitious pathways and goals; navigating uncharted waters with a sense of optimism, albeit caution, viz-a-viz setbacks, failures and hindrances. In the process, though some countries thrived well in adapting to the evolving post-pandemic era, others couldn’t stay on board, and had to change course.

This unfolding scenario was taken advantage of by global tech companies going haywire; introducing high-tech products, devices including laptops, smart devices, and what-not, together with a range of online platforms, services and apps. Eventually, such products and services flooded the markets, which, by and large turned out to be a blessing-in-disguise and complimentary towards addressing the looming health and safety concerns, much to the relief and expectations of students and their parents alike. These tech companies and their subsidiaries reportedly make enormous profits, amid catering to growing demands of online education services, enabling stakeholders to run their virtual online systems, applications and back-up services round the clock at affordable costs. Needless to note, the tech services aren’t confined only to the online education sector. Their services are now being widely adopted and practiced in a wide array of activities, cutting across multiple sectors of online education, involving students and youth alike, seeking opportunities in both formal and informal education.

Primarily, the online mode has its own advantages viz-a-viz drawbacks. For the sake of clarity, let me briefly discuss the status-quo of online mode vs formal mode.

1. Online education enables students to work from home, inter-alia, benefitting them to mitigate their foremost health, well-being, anxiety and security concerns, being the underlying reasons for the introduction of online education in the first place. Secondly, it affords students to avoid long hours of class-room education, and avail them of the opportunity to pick and choose their educational needs on a case-by-case basis, thus catering to their specific needs, situations, and concerns. On the other hand, students averse to school education have the option to shift to online mode, at their own terms.

2. In countries where weather/climate plays a part in the day-to-day running of schools, online education appears to be complimentary; in offering a greater degree of flexibility, freedom and choice, albeit in extremely hazardous weather conditions; in contrast to formal education. More importantly, online mode could help parents/students in making informed decisions on a child’s preferred mode of education, based on the student’s and parent’s comfort zones. That said, it makes sense for students to weigh in on weather /climate patterns to make informed decisions on his/her preferred mode of education.

3. Online mode tends to be a favorable choice for students of expat parents in view of the latter’s exigency of service abroad. For such students online mode is considered more attractive and sensible, so as to ensure continuity of education without hindrance.

4. It is often the case that students into online education pay comparatively less than those opting for formal education. In contrast, students pursuing formal education ought to pay more, besides incurring additional levies on account of routine services. As such, the overall cost outlay for students into online education would be comparatively less.

5. Online education is affordable for students in view of tailor-made courses offered at a nominal cost with minimum staff and overheads. Online schools adopt flexible tools and platforms to lower operational budgets to the barest minimum possible, in the course of delivering optimum services across multiple time zones. With emphasis on cost cutting and optimization being at the heart of online education, the students/parents alike will enjoy peace of mind, and the benefit of making value for money, while striving for quality education. The fact that online education is just confined to online/virtual mode, sans any collaterals, buildings or real estate at play, there will be no extra costs for students on account of additional staff or ancillary items, besides core academic staff at work.

6. A high degree of autonomy and flexibility in virtual education is a distinct advantage, making it all the more attractive, competitive and hassle free to all. Flexible hours of education, open-ended syllabus and diverse curriculum choices etc, considered added benefits and advantages, besides accommodating students’ concerns and appeals on their merits / demerits, at times students are hard pressed for flexible hours and options.

7. An additional feature in online schooling is the option and flexibility for students to avail themselves of pre-recorded lessons after school hours as the case may be.

8. Parents will be absolutely hassle free, with no direct bearing on the child’s logistics in regard to transport, security, tuition etc involving his/her day-to-day online schooling.

“Live as if you were to die tomorrow. Learn as if you were to live forever.” – Mahatma Gandhi

*The writer is a retired Ambassador and Foreign Ministry Spokesman. Additionally he is the Co-Founder and Board Member of Global Horizon School, Pvt Ltd. He can be reached at schandrad@hotmail.com

Sri Lanka At Crossroads Viz-A-Viz Youth: A Clarion Call For Course Correction