Suzi … missing Sri Lanka

Although based in Switzerland, singer Suzi Flückiger (better known in the scene here as Suzi Croner), still calls her land of birth … “home,” and her mind is very much focused on Sri Lanka these days.

She had plans, she says, to travel to Colombo, mainly to spend Christmas with her loved ones, but she found her workload, in Switzerland, doubled, due to the festive period … and then came Cyclone Ditwah!

Suzi went on to say that she is so saddened by what has taken place in Sri Lanka.

“I’m hoping the recovery period will be short and normalcy will return soon.”

Generally, her trips to Colombo are mainly to entertain her music lovers, fans and her friends, and she last visited the island, in September, this year, as a performer, and did her thing at a five-star venue for the Oktoberfest celebrations.

As usual, the crowd enjoyed her performance; Suzi is, indeed, a very entertaining artiste.

Suzi is also a favourite with the crowd in Melbourne, Australia, and has already been booked to perform at a Valentine’s Day event, in Melbourne, in February, 2026 – her fourth trip Down Under.

With the cyclone disaster in mind, Suzi indicated that she would love to do a fund-raiser, during her trip to Australia … if the possibilities are there.

The singer is very keen to checkout Sri Lanka, as soon as possible, and indicated she is now looking forward to coming this way, after her Australian trip.

In her home town of Switzerland, Suzi performs four nights a week and the scene, according to Suzi, gets hectic as Christmas and the dawning of the New Year gets closer.

“I will be doing special events on Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, and New Year’s Eve.”

However, the day after Christmas, 26th December, she says she is going to have a Christmas party, at home, for her friends.

“They keep worrying me for a party and so I thought …let’s have the get-together on 26th December.”

Suzi also takes this opportunity to wish everyone in Sri Lanka a Christmas filled with love, sharing and helping, and a happy, prosperous and peaceful 2026.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.