Court of Appeal invalidates IRD classification of National Cricketers as SLC employees for Tax Purpose

Colombo, Aug. 31 (Daily Mirror) - The Court of Appeal today issued a writ order invalidating the Inland Revenue Department’s (IRD) classification of Sri Lanka’s national cricketers as employees of Sri Lanka Cricket (SLC), for tax purposes with retrospective effect.

The Court of Appeal delivered this judgment pursuant to writ petitions filed by former ODI Captain Charith Asalanka, Test Captain Dhananjaya de Silva, and national women’s cricketers Chamari Athapaththu and Anushka Sanjeewani.

The entire contracted cricketers, male and female, through their captains challenged this decision of the Inland Revenue which was effected in October 2024 which had retrospective application classifying national cricketers as employees and on that basis effected applicability of Advance Personal Income Tax (APIT) on the cricketers.

The cricketers argued in court through their petitions that they are not employees and for many years, they wererecognised as independent service providers and tax collection should be effected in the manner for independent service providers. Counsel appearing for the male cricketers, Nishan Sydney Premathiratne, for and behalf of the cricketers informed “….first and foremost, the cricketers and myself and our legal team are immensely thankful to the Lordships of the Court of Appeal for an extensive hearing on the matter. At the time this action was instituted, there was a misapprehension in the publicdomain that this case was instituted by the national cricketers to avoid taxes which was incorrect and such misapprehensions were unfair by them. However, that position was in fact wrong and cricketers werechallenging a wrongful classification where they were by an overnight decision classified as employees of Sri Lanka Cricket for the purposes of the applicability and collection of Advanced Personal Income Tax.

The cricketers were withheld of professional contractual payments for several months owing to the retrospective nature of this decision. The cricketers were not beneficiaries at any given time of any EPF, ETF, gratuity, or any other employment benefits or annual leave or maternity leave which general employees are afforded whilst cricketers had extreme uncertainties in relation to their contracts with Sri Lanka Cricket. More than 50 national contracted cricketers, both male and female, placed their grievances before Court through affidavits.”

Counsel Nishan Sydney Premathiratne appeared with Attorneys Shenali Dias and Sidath Gajanayaka on the instructions of Gamindu Karunasena appeared for the petitioners representing the male cricketers.

President’s Counsel Dr. Harsha Cabral with Attorneys Vikum Jayasinghe and Manith Dasanayake on the instructions of Gamindu Karunasena appeared for the petitioners representing the female cricketers.

Deputy Solicitor General Manohara Jayasinghe appeared for the Hon. Attorney General representing the Inland Revenue Department.

President’s Counsel Kuvera de Soyza with Attorney Sajana de Soyza on the instructions of Sanjay Fonseka represented the formers members of Sri Lanka Cricket.