Relations with US authorities and with gentleman-Minister Gamani Jayasuriya

Now I turn briefly to the overall relationship that we had developed with the United States Department of Agriculture and other US governmental and non governmental authorities on the important aspect of ensuring wheat shipments to Sri Lanka, under aid programs. During the course of handling my responsibilities as Secretary Food, I had to travel to Washington many times. During these visits I was able to establish valuable personal contacts, in the relevant US departments and agencies. It helps both sides to know whom they are dealing with. If the relationship develops, it usually evolves towards a considerable degree of friendship, understanding and trust.

The foundation and basis is always mutual respect. When you deal with people at high levels of government in other countries, your own designation however impressive it may be is only of limited value, unless it is backed by uptodate and relevant knowledge on your subject area, experience, communication skills, wide interests and the ability to talk about them, and above all, credibility. It is only on these bases that you could establish relationships with able and sophisticated people.

I have had meetings and discussions with relevant persons in the State Department, Agency for International Development (AID), and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and above all, with several officials in the Department of Agriculture (USDA.) There was an occasion where I had to go right up to the White House, about which I will write later. During these meetings, it was possible to establish considerable personal rapport, which in turn led to benefits for the country.

We received enhanced allocations of aid to purchase wheat under PL 480. This took pressure off our foreign exchange resources, and assisted the process of ensuring food security. Some of our Ambassadors in Washington during this time such as Ernest Corea and Susantha de Alwis, who served for a fairly long period were consistently helpful. The fact that they were able people who knew a wide circle of important persons, and enjoyed credibility and respect was immensely helpful.

The fact that during that period our teams to Washington which included officials from the Food Ministry, Food Department and the External Resources Department of the Treasury were all carefully chosen and consisted of able people gave us a great advantage. US officials have told us as well as our Ambassadors and on at least one occasion, I know of, the State Minister for Food that they regarded the way we conducted business as a model which they hoped other countries would emulate. All this led to the creation of a fund of goodwill and considerable respect.

There were many occasions therefore that US officials went out of their way to be helpful. I would like as an example to refer to just one such instance. This also illustrates how developing personal relationships matter. Over a couple of years I had developed a degree of friendship with a high official of the Department of Agriculture. During our meetings, we discovered that we had an intellectual interest in history. We enjoyed spending some time, both officially and socially, when we had dinner together, discussing various eras, aspects and trends in history.

This led to our exchanging books on history. He sent me a book dealing with historical trends and I sent him two paper back books Professor E.H. Carr’s “What is History?” and Professor Herbert Butterfields “The WhigInterpretation of History.” We had also talked about our families, children and so on. On one occasion when I was in Washington and called on him in his office, after the preliminary exchange of pleasantries, he announced that he had something like an extra 12 million dollars left over under the PL 480 program, due mainly to the delay in some countries acting on the allocations given to them. “Everyone is not as efficient as you are,” he said. I thanked him and quickly asked “Don’t you think it would be fair to reward efficiency?”

He said “I take your point. But naturally I can’t give you the entire amount. I will have to deal with some other countries too.” I said “Look, I am very grateful that you told me of this availability. You need not have done so at all. You know all about us. I will therefore leave it entirely to you to give us whatever you could. It will be a great help.” He thought for sometime and said “I will give you the maximum I can – US dollars 5 million.”

I thanked him most sincerely. I was indeed grateful. I kept in touch with him whenever I could even after I left the Ministry. On one occasion, when I was Secretary to the Ministry of Education and Higher Education, I had to travel to another country, and I discovered by accident that my friend was working in the US Embassy there. I telephoned the Embassy to talk to him and also see whether we could get together to have a meal. But unfortunately he was out of the country, and I had to make do with leaving a message.

We had also built excellent relations with the US Wheat Associates, the influential apex body of US wheat farmers. They had been extremely helpful in trying to obtain for us the maximum possible allocation under PL480. Our relations were so good that they invited me to attend one of their special Board meetings in Honolulu, Hawaii and deliver one of the keynote addresses at the convention of National Wheat Growers.

The authorities at the time took an enlightened approach to this kind of invitation, not regarding it as a mere trip abroad, but as an honour which should be accepted. They had the wisdom to see that the relationships built at these high levels would prove to be very useful to the country. I particularly say this because many are the times I have seen Ministers merely engaging in simple arithmetic just counting the number of times a public servant had gone abroad, instead of seriously pondering issues of relevance and value. This is not to say that public servants do not try to go abroad whenever a chance appears. Some of them certainly do. What I am commenting on is trivial bean counting and the absence of mature judgment.

These visits to the United States also gave me a wider exposure, because our Ambassadors and other senior embassy officials generally, all of whom I knew very well, often discussed many issues with me and sought my views. Sometimes, if I had a free slot which coincided with one of their important meetings with high US officials, they invited me to go along with them. I remember one such occasion where Ambassador Corea took me to a luncheon meeting with some senior State Department officials, which included a previous Ambassador to Sri Lanka. Ambassador Ben Fonseka, our Permanent Representative at the UN, flew in from New York for this meeting.

When we met at the International Club in Washington, I could see that the atmosphere was warm, informal and friendly. During the introductions and the bantering before we sat down, I too entered into the spirit of the occasion and told the Americans, “Gentlemen, the Portuguese delegation has arrived.” There was loud laughter, because the three on our side were Corea, Fonseka and Pieris. Once the bantering was over, we got down to lunch and serious discussions. I saw that this was a professional discussion by experienced professionals. Much ground was covered during a relatively short period of time without visible or felt strain. An underlying thread of good humour permeated the whole proceedings. The place where the lunch was held, the International Club, was a very exclusive place. Membership usually cost around US Dollars 19,000. Fortunately, Ambassadors accredited to Washington were given honorary membership.

On some of these visits to Washington I also had the pleasure of meeting Ambassador Chris Van Hollen and his wife Eliza. I had a standing order from Chris that I was not to come to Washington and go without contacting him. Once I had lunch with them at their home in Virginia. But most times Chris used to take me to the Cosmos Club on Massachusetts Avenue, another one of those exclusive clubs in the area. At the time it was a club exclusively for men, although the process was on to admit women. Membership was strictly confined to professionals of a certain intellectual calibre holding positions in various areas such as administration and management; diplomacy; other professions such as law; medicine; etc., and academia.

I was taken round the club by Chris. The library devoted a special section to books written by members of the club, and a corridor contained the portraits of Nobel Prize winning members of the club. It was that kind of exclusive club. It was elitist. But it was an elitism not based on an aristocracy of birth, but an aristocracy of achievement. The club also ran an excellent restaurant, and at one of these lunches I was introduced by Chris to Jim Spain, Ambassador designate to Sri Lanka, who was awaiting confirmation by the Senate. These extra experiences were very enriching and added both to knowledge and perspective.

The relationship of senior officials to ministers is a subject much talked of as well as written about. I propose to deal with this important area analytically, amongst other important issues of governance in a concluding chapter. At this point however, I wish to refer to my relationship with Minister Gamani Jayasuriya. He was a man of principle and a gentleman. At the time I worked with him, he held two portfolios, the one of Agricultural Development and Research, and Food and Co-operatives. I was his Secretary in the latter Ministry, whilst Mr. N.V.K.K. Weragoda was Secretary in the former. The Minister worked from both Ministries, although at times, for the sake of convenience, he used to get down relevant officials from one Ministry to the other.

Mr. Jayasuriya was responsible and conscientious in his approach to his duties, and made certain that he understood everything of importance, in the same manner as one of his outstanding predecessors, Mr. M. D. Banda. Like Mr. Banda and Mr. S.B. Herat, he did not interfere in appointments or disciplinary matters. He had confidence in his officials and expected them to do the right thing. Just to cite an example, there was once heavy pressure on him from Members of Parliament of his party to intervene in the appointment of Co-operative Inspectors. They wanted him to interfere in the results of the examination and appoint their favourites, based on the argument that they possessed the basic qualifications.

Mr. Jayasuriya steadfastly refused to interfere. After one meeting with him, angry MPs were seen leaving his room in Parliament severely criticizing him. One of them was overheard to say “How can we work with Bodhisatvas?!” He obviously wanted to safeguard basic principles. I recall walking into his room when he was with his constituents and hearing him say that he was prepared to recommend someone if deserving, but that he was not prepared to go further and exert pressure on the appointing authorities to take the person.

Temperamentally, Mr. Jayasuriya differed somewhat from my previous Minister, Mr. Herat. Mr. Herat had a very equable temperament, and found it difficult to get angry. Mr. Jayasuriya, on the contrary demonstrated at times, a peculiar mixture of affability and irritability. He was jovial at one moment, and quite testy at another. Unfortunately one day, I ran into him when he was in one of his testier moods. I happened to walk into his room in the Food Ministry one evening at about 5.30 p.m. because I had something important to discuss. As I entered, he half glared at me, and before I could say anything, proceeded to give me an order on some matter, in a peremptory tone.

His tone and manner caught me by surprise and irritated me. But more than that I saw several harmful implications in carrying out his order. Straightaway, I could think of at least two other options that were safer and better. There could have been more, if only there was time for reflection. I started to politely tell him that there were some better options, but he interrupted me halfway and with suppressed anger said “You carry out my order,” and muttered something about “bureaucracy,” under his breath.

Now I am afraid, I lost my temper. I was as an official and a person, diligent, responsible and hardworking. I was a senior Secretary. I believed that whatever appointments I got in government was due to nothing else but my own record of performance. I was beholden to nobody. Mr. Jayasuriya’s tone and manner therefore hurt, upset and angered me. I was quite charged up by now. The last time I lost my temper with a Minister was with Mrs. Bandaranaike, an event which I have recorded in an earlier chapter.

I sat down, facing him. I told him that with every passing day, I saw very little difference between Ministers and bureaucrats, because Ministers were usurping the powers and doing the work of bureaucrats; that I had a duty as his Secretary to advice him; that a duty could be pleasant, unpleasant or neutral , that on this occasion although it was unpleasant, I was still going to discharge it and say that there were much better options, two of which I quickly mentioned. The Minister was red in face gritting his teeth and speechless. I then got up and began walking towards the door saying “Now that I have discharged my duty, I will go and carry out your order.”

As I opened the door, he bellowed “Do any damned thing you want.” This of course meant that the force of what I had said had struck him and that he was prepared to reconsider. But he was very angry. By the time I came to my room, my anger had gone, because I have had my say. But I was feeling deeply upset, and guilty that I had lost my temper, which I had no business to do. There was no question, I had lost control and I was now more upset at this failure on my part, than the Minister’s tone and manner, which had triggered off this unfortunate incident.

There was nothing one could do now. What was past was past. The Commissioner of Co-operative Development, Mr. Austin Fernando was waiting for me in my room to discuss some matters. Shortly after I started talking to him, the Minister’s office-aide came in and said that the Minister had left. This was standard practice. The Secretary is usually informed when the Minister comes in, and goes out. I continued my discussion with the C.C.D, when towards 6.45 p.m. my “Hot line,” or the security telephone hooked up to a special exchange rang. It was the Minister.

“I say, Dharmasiri, I lost my temper. I am sorry,” he said. I said, “Sir, I lost mine too, and I am very sorry.” “You know, I have been trying to give up smoking over the last few days, and it is making me irritable,” Mr. Jayasuriya went on. I promptly replied “Sir, if it would help you to stop smoking, you could blackguard me everyday.”

He laughed, and the day ended on this note of amity, but not before I related the story to a curious Mr. Austin Fernando, who overheard this telephone conversation. This happened to be a Monday, and the next day Tuesday, we as usual had the Secretaries meeting at 8.30 a.m. in the Cabinet office. Dr. Malinga Fernando, who was Secretary to the Ministry of Health, walked up to me and said “So, your Minister apologized to you yesterday.” I was mystified as to how he knew. But it turned out that both of them had been at dinner together that night, where the Minister had related this story. That was the gentleman that Mr. Jayasuriya was.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobigraphy of MDD Pieris)

Central Expressway and Dream Destinations and Changing the Way of Delivering Projects

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.