Doctors Without Borders unveils Wall Mural in Patna, Bihar to Mark World AIDS Day

This World AIDS Day, Médecins Sans Frontières/Doctors Without Borders (MSF) India, in collaboration with Bihar State AIDS Control Society (BSACS) and Guru Gobind Singh Hospital (GGSH), unveiled a wall mural at Garima Ki Kiran Clinic, the advanced HIV centre within GGSH. The mural carries a message to dispel myths and challenge stigma around HIV. Advancements in HIV treatment have ensured that people living with HIV (PLHIV), adhering to treatment, not only live normal lives but also prevent transmission of the virus to others, including mother-to-child transmission during pregnancy. Yet, the stigma faced by people living with HIV continues to affect their ability to access and adhere to treatment.

The mural, created by artist Ravi Shankar, reflects the power of community participation and science in responding to HIV. It is part of MSF’s ongoing efforts to raise awareness about the challenges faced by people living with HIV and to promote empathy, awareness and community resilience. It also highlights MSF’s comprehensive care approach, which includes a strong focus on nutrition, mental health support and social support that help patients navigate the socio-economic barriers to treatment.

Apart from unveiling the Wall Mural, MSF carried out a series of awareness and community-engagement activities in Patna. These included information booths and street plays to spread awareness and promote emotional support among people living with advanced HIV. MSF also ran an awareness campaign with promotional vehicles, conducted district-level outreach, and set up an interactive selfie stand for community participation.

Since 2019, MSF has been providing holistic, lifesaving care for people living with advanced HIV at GGSH in Patna. Many patients face significant challenges including delayed diagnosis, financial strain, social isolation, and stigma. Patients with advanced HIV (a condition where the immune system is very weak and can’t fight off infections well. This usually happens when PLHIV do not receive continuous treatment of anti-retroviral drugs) face extremely high mortality rates and require integrated care that covers clinical treatment, nutrition, mental health, and social support.

Dialog Enterprise Principal Sponsor of Sri Lanka CERT National Cyber Security Conference 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.