Sri Lanka Brand Conclave 2026 tomorrow

Key event to unite global expertise and local insights to shape future brands

Sri Lanka Brand Conclave 2026, which is scheduled to be held on 28 July at Cinnamon Grand, will place global brand leadership thinking at the centre of Sri Lanka’s marketing landscape, bringing together internationally recognised experts, senior business leaders and marketing professionals to explore how organisations can build stronger, future-ready brands in a rapidly evolving marketplace.

National University of Singapore NUS Business School Associate Professor of Marketing and Academic Director of the Executive MBA Dr. Prem Shamdasani, Marketing Leadership Institute CEO and Founder of The Marketing Leadership Masterclass Thomas Barta; The One Club for Creativity APAC Regional Director and BBDO Singapore former Creative Chairman Tay Guan Hin; and Aleph Group Country Director for Sri Lanka and Bangladesh Ehsanul Hoque, are the global voices that will be featured at the conclave shaping the future of branding and marketing.

The conclave, which is designed to serve as Sri Lanka’s flagship platform for brand leadership and innovation, will explore the factors transforming modern brands, varying from creativity and purpose to artificial intelligence, digital transformation, and evolving consumer expectations.

Dr. Prem Shamdasani will discuss the increasing significance of purpose-driven brands and how businesses can build deep relationships with consumers. Thomas Barta will explore how marketers can evolve from brand managers into leaders who contribute to the growth of their business. Md. Ehsanul Hoque will highlight new developments and trends in AI-powered marketing within Google’s evolving ecosystem, while Tay Guan Hin will address creativity as a strategic advantage in building distinctive brands.

Beyond the keynote sessions, the program will include strategic conversations designed to offer useful perspectives from senior leaders influencing Sri Lanka’s business landscape. Leaders from Prima and Spa Ceylon will participate in a panel discussion titled “Disrupt to Win – Creating Brands People Love and Advocate For” to discuss how brands can foster stronger consumer relationships and inspire advocacy.

Senior marketing leaders from Singer Sri Lanka and Dialog Axiata will participate in the CMO Dialogue, “How Brands are Leveraging the Modern Digital Ecosystem and the Evolving Skills in Demand,” which will explore how organisations are adapting to digital transformation, evolving consumer behavior, and the changing capabilities needed in modern marketing teams.

A Strategy to Action session will also be included in the programme, which will bring together industry leaders from CBL and Fotera to discuss how organisations can convert brand strategy into measurable business outcomes. The conversation will provide useful insights on carrying out brand initiatives, promoting growth, and generating long-term value in a market that is becoming increasingly competitive.

The conclave program will also offer delegates access to expert deep dives of today’s brand playbook, local and global case studies, consumer data, including Gen Z behavior, and the current thoughts on AI, creativity, purpose, and community-driven brand growth. To strengthen brand performance and deal with changing market dynamics, participants will be exposed to global perspectives, practical frameworks, and actionable strategies.

Sri Lanka Brand Forum Founder and Chairman Shariful Islam said: “The role of brands has transformed significantly. Today, businesses have to understand not just how to communicate with consumers, but how to develop relevance, trust and lasting value in a continuously changing environment. Sri Lanka Brand Conclave was designed to connect our marketing community with global thinking while creating meaningful discussions around the realities and opportunities within our own market. Our vision is to build a platform where leaders can learn, exchange ideas and shape the future of branding in Sri Lanka.”

CMOs, business leaders, entrepreneurs, marketers, and brand professionals will come together for a day of learning, collaboration, and knowledge sharing at the Sri Lanka Brand Conclave 2026. The conclave seeks to strengthen Sri Lanka’s brand ecosystem and support the next generation of brand leadership by connecting global expertise with local insights.