Are we lying to our children?

If you have a child, grandchild, niece or nephew, what do you hope for their future? My guess is, you would hope they will become well-educated, responsible and active citizens, who have a respectable career, are married, and one day have a family of their own.

So, how do they get there? By being good children, we tell them. We often praise children for being ‘good’, usually from the time they are born. They are ‘good’ if they don’t cry, if they are quiet, well-behaved, and don’t make a fuss. They are ‘good’ if they are obedient, and do as they are told.

I believe this is a lie. Being respectful, disciplined and honest is important. But always being good? Always doing what you’re told? Never doing anything naughty? That sounds like a recipe for disaster.

Why do I say this? The child who is always ‘good’ probably doesn’t make mistakes. They never fail. Never get a D. Never have a boyfriend or girlfriend. Doesn’t go to parties. They enter adulthood with little idea of who they are, what they like, what they think, what matters to them or where they are heading. Most dangerous of all, they have little exposure to the realities of life. However, because they were ‘good’ children, no one, including themselves, is concerned. After all, they had good grades, were studious, stayed out of trouble and appeared on track to enter a good university.

They then reach their mid-twenties, and suddenly, everyone has forgotten about exam results. There is a new question on the tip of everyone’s tongue, which is ‘So, do you have a boyfriend/girlfriend?’ This soon evolves to, ‘So, when are you getting married?’ and that child is confused. Boyfriends and girlfriends used to be ‘bad’, and now they are suddenly essential. They didn’t realize there was another timeline, and a whole other set of goals they should have been thinking about. They don’t know where to start. They are vulnerable.

As Sri Lankans, we place great value on education, for both girls and boys. This is something to be proud of. Books, classes, exams – yes, they are important. Doing well academically, getting a degree and a job play a key role in eventually leading a prosperous life. However, if we hope our children will be well-rounded adults, shouldn’t we support them to be well-rounded children, with a well-rounded education that prepares them for the real world?

I propose freedom. Freedom to make mistakes. To be ‘naughty’ or ‘bad’ children, once in a while. Freedom to ask questions, have awkward, difficult conversations, argue, and think. Freedom to explore – places, people, experiences, different opinions and ways of living. Freedom to get hurt. Freedom to fail.

Freedom is not possible without knowledge. Knowledge enables freedom, and also boundaries it. What topics matter? I suggest the following, in no particular order- how the human body works, how to live a truly ‘healthy’ life, how to be mindful, drugs (including cigarettes, electronic cigarettes and tobacco, and addiction), how to date respectfully, sexual and reproductive health, mental health, how to choose a life partner, how to argue, what it means to have integrity, how to use social media and AI, how to interpret information, and how to be financially secure. In addition, especially for girls, how to plan a career around having children and nurturing a family life, should also be included. I am sure there are many more topics.

Where should this knowledge come from? School is important. This cannot all be taught in classrooms, but conversations can be had, aided by history, philosophy and literature. Family is key. Parents need to be able to have honest, and sometimes difficult conversations with their children. Children need to feel they can trust their parents, and speak without fear or judgment. They will also learn from observing the behaviour of adults, so ideally, parents, teachers and extended family model a well-rounded approach to life.

What happens if our children are not given freedom through knowledge? They will not be well-rounded children, and will not become well-rounded adults. They will be ill-prepared for the real world. What would this look like? A teenage girl who is so stressed about her A-levels that she gains weight, her periods stop, and she doesn’t go out anymore. A marriage that has occurred between two people who do not know each other well, have unrealistic expectations of each other, or are wholly incompatible. A couple that cannot resolve their sexual problems and live their days out unhappily. Hiding mental or physical illness. In short, not knowing how to navigate the challenges of life, and not knowing how to access help.

What a shame these situations are. They are all preventable, and still fixable. Instead, many people suffer the consequences of such situations their entire lives. If we think such issues will ‘fall into place’ and ‘sort themselves out’, we are being naive.

Let us celebrate the ‘bad’ and ‘naughty’ children. Let us empower our children with knowledge and freedom.

(Lihini is rediscovering her love for writing while embracing first-time motherhood, and navigating her roles as doctor and PhD researcher. She hopes to inspire a generation of naughty children who will cause just the right amount of mischief.)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.