AIIB Treasurer urges bigger liquidity buffers as global risks intensify

Reserve managers may need to hold larger liquidity buffers than in the past as heightened geopolitical tensions and increasingly unpredictable market shocks test even the strongest liquidity frameworks, Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) Treasurer Domenico Nardelli said yesterday. He poninted out the current market and geopolitical environment warranted a more conservative approach towards liquidity, despite the costs associated with maintaining larger cash buffers.

“My view as a treasurer is that in the current market geopolitical situation, in particular, you probably have to hold more liquidity than we were used to before. The simple reason is that, however strong your liquidity policy is, it is always one shock away from being tested,”Nardelli said, addressing a fully packed audience at the inaugural session of the Reserve Management Conference 2026 in Colombo yesterday.

Shocks are increasingly taking different forms, ranging from accelerated cash outflows and operational incidents to cyber attacks and geopolitical conflicts, with crises tending to unfold rapidly once triggered.

He stressed that larger liquidity buffers would not necessarily protect an institution from a full-blown crisis, but could strengthen its ability to withstand initial pressure and provide crucial time to make strategic decisions.

“Holding a larger liquidity chest makes every institution stronger. During adverse times, and we are seeing more and more bouts of adverse times recently, this buys you more time to take important strategic decisions.”

Drawing parallels with the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank in 2023, he said financial crises frequently followed a familiar pattern where an unexpected shock was compounded by insufficient cash to reassure clients or investors.

Nardelli acknowledged that carrying additional liquidity came at a cost, particularly for financial institutions where excess liquidity could weigh on profitability.

However, he argued that the cost should increasingly be viewed as insurance rather than simply a drag on earnings.

“If those costs, instead of as a drag on profits, were viewed as insurance, the discussion would be a lot easier to have,” he said.

The AIIB Treasurer also flagged growing volatility in assets traditionally regarded as safe, warning that reserve managers could no longer assume that such instruments would provide the degree of stability historically associated with them.

He pointed to sharp movements in US Treasury securities, including swings in longer-dated bonds, as evidence that even the core assets of official institutional portfolios were becoming more exposed to market gyrations.

“We need to be aware that even the safe assets that form the bread and butter of official institutions’ portfolios are becoming more exposed to market gyrations, and we have to be mindful of that,” Nardelli said.

He stressed that reserve management in such an environment should be less focused on attempting to forecast market prices and levels and more on preserving confidence, maintaining liquidity, protecting capital and retaining policy flexibility when confronted with circumstances that are difficult to predict.