LankaPay ties up with BASL as Corporate Partner

BASL President Rajeev Amarasuriya (left) with LankaPay CEO Channa de Silva flanked by officials of the two institutions

Sri Lanka’s National Payment Network, operating under the guidance of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka – LankaPay, has partnered with the Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) as a Corporate Partner. LankaPay also operates the LankaSign digital certification service, the only commercially operating Certification Service Provider (CSP) authorised by the National Certification Authority of Sri Lanka.

Welcoming LankaPay on board, BASL President Rajeev Amarasuriya said: “We are happy to welcome LankaPay as a Corporate Partner of the BASL. As the legal profession evolves alongside technological advancements, BASL recognises its responsibility as the professional body for legal profession in Sri Lanka to support its members in transitioning seamlessly into a digitalised legal system. In this context, we see strong potential for meaningful collaboration through this partnership with LankaPay.”

Alongside this partnership, both institutions will work closely to promote and implement digital signatures among the legal fraternity. This collaboration underscores the shared commitment of LankaPay and BASL to advancing secure, efficient, and modern legal processes while empowering legal practitioners to confidently navigate the digital era, and also to navigate times of crisis such as the present where digital signatures provide the convenience of signing legal documents from anywhere at any time, bringing greater efficiency and flexibility to the legal documentation process.

Speaking on the partnership, LankaPay CEO Channa de Silva said: “We have identified the legal fraternity as a key pillar that must be fully digitised in the country’s digital transformation journey. This partnership presents an important opportunity to strengthen our engagement with legal fraternity. Through this partnership, we reaffirm our support for BASL’s progressive initiatives and look forward to working closely with them to explore digitalisation opportunities, particularly in promoting the adoption of digitally signing of documents securely among its members, enabling a more secure, efficient, and future-ready legal ecosystem.”

He added: “Through this sponsorship, we reaffirm our support for BASL’s progressive initiatives and look forward to working closely with the Bar Association of Sri Lanka to explore digitalisation opportunities, particularly in promoting the adoption of digital signatures among its members, enabling a more secure, efficient, and future-ready legal ecosystem.”

With the ongoing digitalisation efforts in the legal system, the transition to digital processes is now imminent and no longer optional. Against this backdrop, the partnership marks a significant milestone for both institutions, reinforcing their shared commitment to supporting the legal fraternity in adapting to an increasingly digital legal landscape.