Gem Sri Lanka 2026 set  to unfold its biggest story yet at Shangri-La Colombo

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake at last year’s edition of Gem Sri Lanka 2025

Building on the resounding success of its first two editions, Gem Sri Lanka 2026 is poised to mark a defining moment in the country’s gem and jewellery industry when it takes place on 7, 8 and 9 January, at the iconic Shangri-La Colombo.

Gem Sri Lanka is organised by the Ceylon Gem and Jewellery Traders Association (CGJTA), the largest trade body in the gem and jewellery industry in Sri Lanka with over 2,000 members.

The move to Shangri-La Colombo reflects the remarkable growth of the exhibition. What began as a focused industry initiative has now evolved into a landmark international event. With over 100 top-notch world-class exhibitors confirmed, Gem Sri Lanka 2026 is expected to become the largest presentation of the coloured gemstones in the history of Sri Lanka, underscoring the momentum that this event has gained over a short span of time and the collective strength of the world-class exhibitors of Gem Sri Lanka.

This year, the exhibition anticipates double the footfall of foreign buyers and trade professionals, together with a significantly expanded international audience, reaffirming Sri Lanka’s position as one of the world’s most trusted and admired sources of finest Gemstones.

Adding further prestige, Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya will grace the event as Chief Guest at the official inauguration, highlighting the national importance of the gem and jewellery sector to the country’s heritage and economy.

This exhibition will showcase an immersive industry experience with an exceptional collection of sapphires and premium coloured gem stones.

Gala 2026 – Brilliance and Beyond which serves as a vibrant networking platform, bringing together traders, international buyers, and industry leaders in a setting that celebrates the gem trade in a glamorous way.

The launch of a historic publication covering the legacy of gemstones in Sri Lanka – The Sapphire Legacy

With its expanded scale, prestigious venue, distinguished leadership presence, and historic initiatives, Gem Sri Lanka 2026 represents more than an exhibition—it is a statement of confidence, heritage, and future promise.

As the world turns its attention to Colombo this January, Gem Sri Lanka 2026 is set to reaffirm Sri Lanka’s place at the pinnacle of the global gem trade.