Mediafactory breaks into Asia-Pacific’s Top 100 most effective agencies

Mediafactory has been named among Asia-Pacific’s top 100 most effective agency offices, securing 35th place in the 2025 Effie global Index for APAC region.

The achievement places the Sri Lankan media agency among leading agencies from some of the region’s largest and most competitive advertising markets.

Released by Effie Worldwide in June 2026, the 2025 Effie Index ranks the marketing industry’s most effective agencies, marketers and brands based on finalist and winner data from Effie Awards programmes around the world. Building on Effie’s recognition of marketing effectiveness since 1968, the annual Index is widely regarded as one of the industry’s leading benchmarks. Its agency office rankings recognise the work credited to individual offices through Effie-recognised campaigns.

For Mediafactory, the result marks an important milestone in a journey that began in 2005, when it entered the market as Sri Lanka’s first specialised independent media agency. Over two decades of industry firsts and achievements, the agency has continued to evolve while remaining a pioneering force in Sri Lanka’s marketing communications landscape.

Bradeepa Emmanuel, CEO of Mediafactory said the recognition was a proud moment for the agency and reflected the vision on which it was founded more than two decades ago.

“When Mediafactory was established as Sri Lanka’s first dedicated media agency, we believed there was an opportunity to do things differently. To see that vision recognised today through the Effie Index is something we are truly proud of.

Being ranked alongside agency offices from some of Asia-Pacific’s largest advertising markets shows that work developed in Sri Lanka can stand alongside the very best in the region. While we are proud of this achievement, we see it as motivation to keep improving, continue delivering the best possible solutions for our clients and build on what we have achieved together.”