AIA Insurance ranked #1 Life Insurer in Customer Excellence

AIA Insurance has been recognised as the #1 Life Insurer in Customer Excellence in the prestigious LMD Customer Service Excellence Survey 2025, reaffirming its commitment to delivering exceptional service and helping Sri Lankans live Healthier, Longer, Better Lives.

The LMD Customer Service Excellence Survey is widely regarded as a benchmark for evaluating customer satisfaction across Sri Lanka. Conducted online, this year’s survey attracted over 3,200 responses, with participants voting for their preferred establishments in 40 categories of service organisations. The survey aims to identify the most trusted service providers and gain insights into evolving customer expectations. The methodology behind the survey ensures credibility and transparency.

Securing the top position among life insurers is a powerful testament of AIA’s commitment to customer-first principles that reflect AIA’s deep understanding of evolving customer expectations and its ability to deliver innovative solutions that truly resonate. Every interaction is designed to be seamless and meaningful, ensuring customers experience convenience and care at every stage of their journey. This achievement reinforces AIA’s philosophy that customer service is not merely a support function, but a strategic element of the business model. By embedding service excellence into its DNA and leveraging insights to anticipate future needs, AIA continues to set industry benchmarks and redefine what it means to lead with customer-centricity.

Commenting on the accolade, Director/Chief Executive Officer of AIA Sri Lanka, Chathuri Munaweera shared, “Being ranked #1 for customer excellence reflects our commitment to delivering exceptional service and building lasting relationships with our customers. We believe that every interaction matters, and we continuously strive to create meaningful experiences that go beyond insurance.”

The survey serves as a reminder of the growing importance of customer experience in today’s competitive landscape. AIA continues to integrate customer feedback into its service enhancements and to anticipate future needs, ensuring that every interaction adds value to the customer journey in its mission to empower individuals and families to live Healthier, Longer, Better Lives.

Resonance: Celebrating 15+ Years of Purpose, Passion, and People at AIESEC in USJ

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.