Multi-stakeholder dialogue on dairy sector development

DevPro, (the legacy organization of OXFAM in Sri Lanka) recently convened a Roundtable Discussion on ‘Unlocking Sri Lanka’s Dairy Potential’ with the participation of government, private sector, development partners and others. Building on the momentum of a national high-level event convened in May 2025, the follow up Roundtable explored policy interventions and collaborative actions to support to uplift the dairy sector aligned with national priorities.

Kicking off the discussion, DevPro’s Executive Director, Chamindry Saparamadu highlighted the critical role of the private sector in enabling a sustainable transformation of the dairy sector. She emphasized that private sector’s effectiveness can be amplified through public-private partnerships combining investment, technical training and institutional strengthening, international support that could work in tandem with the private sector to address supply-chain inefficiencies and bolster productivity and multi-stakeholder policy dialogues advocating for stable policy environment that encourages long-term investment and incentivizes local production.

Dr. Sanjika Perera, Director (Livestock Development) of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Land and Irrigation presented the government priorities for dairy sector development focused on strategies to improve animal nutrition, breeding and health, marketing, research and development and extension and education services. The current plans for the formation of livestock clusters – Dairy Hubs were also discussed in detail. This was followed by a presentation from DevPro’s Business Development Consultant, Chellapah Gnanaganeshan on opportunities and growth drivers for the dairy sector informed by DevPro’s implementation experience across three provinces in Sri Lanka. The proposals mainly focused on new approaches to technology dissemination for dairy development, private sector partnerships for Artificial Insemination (AI) service delivery, private breeder farms to expand breeding stock supply and incentivizing private veterinary services.

Chocoholics Café announces first international expansion with entry into Saudi Arabia

Mahindra Ideal Finance strengthens financial access for Sri Lanka’s working entrepreneurs

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.