Amãna Bank commemorates 15-year milestone by ringing market opening bell

Amãna Bank PLC marked its 15th anniversary by ringing the market opening bell on the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) trading floor earlier this week.

The event celebrated the Bank’s unique presence as one of Sri Lanka’s only banks to conduct all its operations fully disengaged from interest-based transactions.

Commencing its banking operations in 2011, Amãna Bank PLC is a stand-alone institution licensed by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange, with the Jeddah-based IsDB Group being the principal shareholder of the Bank. The IsDB Group is a Supra-National, ‘AAA’ rated multilateral development financial institution with a membership of 57 countries.

Since opening its doors, Amãna Bank has steadily expanded its presence across the country, serving a growing customer base through its 80+ branch and self-banking centre network while remaining focused on Retail, SME, and development-oriented banking with a selective approach to Corporates. The Bank’s asset-backed banking model continues to channel financing towards productive sectors of the economy, supporting entrepreneurs, households, and businesses in a manner aligned with its values and customer-centric promise.

The ceremony’s keynote speakers, Chairman of Amãna Bank PLC Asgi Akbarally, remarked upon the event stating “We are honoured to have been given this opportunity by the Colombo Stock Exchange to mark Amãna Bank’s 15th anniversary through this ceremonial market opening. This occasion is a fitting recognition of the impact the Bank has made over the past 15 years, enabling growth, enriching lives and creating value through our unique development focused people friendly approach to banking. As we celebrate this important milestone, we remain committed to building on this strong foundation and to contributing meaningfully to the continued progress and prosperity of our customers, communities and the Sri Lankan economy.”

Managing Director & CEO of Amãna Bank PLC Mohammed Azmeer, also speaking at the occasion, remarked “We are thankful to the Colombo Stock Exchange for honouring Amãna Bank 15-year journey through today’s ceremonial market opening. Today is not only a celebration of fifteen years, but also an opportunity to reflect on how far Amãna Bank has progressed as a listed financial institution and to look ahead with renewed confidence to the next chapter of our journey. As we look ahead, our focus remains on further strengthening the Bank, creating sustainable value for our shareholders, supporting the country’s economic development, and continuing to deliver on our promise of Development Focused, People Friendly Banking.”

Addressing the gathering, Nilupa Perera, Chief Regulatory Officer of the Colombo Stock Exchange, congratulated Amãna Bank PLC on the milestone, remarking “Amana Bank’s first fifteen years have been defined by vision and progress, and we look forward to seeing the Bank continue to expand its impact in the years ahead.”

Over the years Amana Bank has received numerous accolades, namely ‘Best Up-and-Coming Islamic Bank in the World’ by Global Finance Magazine USA during its formative years, being ranked among the ‘World’s Top 50 Strongest Islamic Banks’ by The Asian Banker and selected as the ‘Most Impactful ICD Investee Company’ by the Islamic Development Bank Group.

The CSE offers a broad range of capital market products, including Sukuks, with Sri Lanka’s first listed Sukuk introduced in 2025.

The commemorative bell-ringing ceremony brought together representatives from Amãna Bank PLC and CSE to celebrate a milestone that underscores the company’s longstanding presence and contribution to Sri Lanka’s economic and financial landscape.