Rupee stability reflective of positive impact of policies taken thus far  – CBSL Governor

The rupee has stabilised somewhat in recent weeks reflecting the impact of policy measures that have been taken thus far, Central Bank Governor Dr Nandalal Weerasinghe said.

“We will continue to closely monitor domestic and global developments for emerging risks and expect the monetary policy tightening carried out previously to transmit to the economy in the period ahead, Central Bank Governor Dr Weerasinghe said at the monthly monetary policy review meeting held at Central Bank head office yesterday.

He said that the CBSL stands ready to take appropriate measures to ensure that inflation stabilises around the 5 percent target, while supporting the economy to reach its potential over the medium term.

Amid those developments the Central Bank kept its Overnight Policy Rate (OPR) unchanged at 8.75 percent, it said in a statement, after considering the evolving conditions and outlook on the domestic and global fronts.

Dr Weerasinghe added: ‘Renewed tensions in the Middle East have resulted in a surge in global commodity prices, particularly petroleum. These developments are likely to dampen global economic prospects with potential spillover.

‘The current low level of inflation, at 1.6 percent year -on-year in February 2026, relative to the target of 5 percent provides sufficient space to accommodate the impact of higher energy prices and their spillovers on inflation.

‘Headline inflation accelerated to 6.8 percent in June 2026, mainly due to higher domestic energy and food prices.

‘Headline inflation is expected to remain above the target of 5% in the near term before gradually returning to the target level. Core inflation is also expected to increase and remain around the headline inflation target.

‘The Board arrived at the decision to maintain the overnight policy rate after carefully considering the evolving conditions and outlook on the domestic and global fronts.

‘Renewed tensions in the Middle East have resulted in a surge in global commodity prices, particularly petroleum. These developments are likely to dampen global economic prospects with potential spillovers to the domestic economy through multiple channels.

‘The monetary policy tightening in May 2026 and its gradual transmission to the real economy are expected to moderate credit growth and the buildup of demand pressures going forward.

‘The pressure on the external sector caused by the Middle East conflict has eased somewhat, although the outlook remains uncertain due to renewed tensions.

‘Since April 2026, the external current account recorded a deficit, mainly because higher fuel import costs widened the merchandise trade deficit and tourism earnings slowed down.

‘Going forward, import demand, including demand for motor vehicles, is expected to reduce in response to recent policy measures.

‘Meanwhile, workers’ remittances have remained strong so far in 2026. Gross Official Reserves stood at USD 6.45 bn at the end of June 2026, amid foreign debt service payments.’

Dengue outbreak exposes multi-billion rupee burden on state health system

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.