18-year-old French student of Lankan origin Bilaal Lookman elected to city council

When Bilaal Lookman cast his vote for the first time in France’s municipal elections last March, he was also on the ballot himself as part of a list of candidates.

At just 18 years old, the first-year law student at the renowned Paris-Panthéon-Assas University has been elected as a municipal councillor in his hometown of Guyancourt, on the outskirts of Paris.

Born in November 2007 in France to a family of Sri Lankan origin from Mannar and Jaffna, he ranks among the youngest elected officials in France.

Interested in public affairs from an early age, he discovered French institutions through internships in the offices of a Member of Parliament, a former Minister of Education, and the mayor of his town at the ages of 15 and 16. This curiosity also led him to meet and engage with the President of Parliament, former ministers, and both French and foreign diplomats.

His commitment to serving others began in childhood through the town’s Children’s Municipal Council and continued in high school, as well as through involvement in a local food-aid association.

“It doesn’t matter where we come from or the path we’ve taken. What matters is what we choose to build together. The future is never guaranteed, but it is shaped by our choices, our efforts, and our determination. This is true in politics, just as it is in our personal lives,” Municipal Councillor of Guyancourt Lookman Bilaal said.

The municipal elections in France were held on 15 and 22 March 2026. He took part by joining the outgoing mayor’s team in his town. The young councillor will now have to balance his studies with his new mandate.

“It is with a strong sense of commitment and public service that I am joining the City Council. I am determined to bring young people and citizens closer to politics. People need to stop thinking that politics is pointless! There is a lot of work to be done for young people, and that is precisely why I am getting involved,” Bilaal added.