AA3 Holdings unveils Lanka’s largest ex-stock heavy equipment showroom in Kiribathgoda

In a bid to meet the growing demand for heavy construction equipment in the industry and marking a new chapter of growth, AA3 Holdings Ltd. opened its state-of-the-art showroom and fully equipped workshop facility in Kiribathgoda today.

The showroom also houses the largest ex-stock inventory of heavy equipment in Sri Lanka, providing customers with faster access to machinery and strengthening AA3 Holdings’ competitive advantage in the market.

“This milestone expansion has been strategically engineered to enhance our service capabilities and deliver an unparalleled ownership experience to our growing clientele,” said AA3 Holdings Chairman/Managing Director Supun Perera.

A highly respected Sri Lankan conglomerate with a heritage dating back to 1986, AA3 Holdings is a premier provider of heavy construction machinery and mining equipment in Sri Lanka and operates as a strategic subsidiary of the diversified Udeshi Group.

“The next-generation showroom, showcasing the latest machinery innovations, allows clients to explore top-tier earthmoving, excavation and road construction equipment firsthand across Sri Lanka and the Maldives,” he said.

The advanced workshop facility is equipped with cutting-edge diagnostic tools and specialised repair machinery to ensure rapid turnaround times and precision servicing.

“We also provide elite after-sales support, backed by a team of factory-trained technicians dedicated to maximising machinery uptime and operational efficiency for our customers’ projects,” he added.

CASE APAC Vice President Emre Karazli said Sri Lanka represents a growing market with significant opportunities, particularly with the advancement of infrastructure projects and expansion of road networks.

He added that CASE places strong emphasis on manufacturing environmentally responsible equipment with reduced emissions, while continuing to deliver high performance and efficiency.

He also disclosed that the company is also building their modern factory in India.

CASE Managing Director Shalahh Chaathurvedi said the company would also host its annual dealer convention in Colombo on Friday and Saturday, with more than 150 international delegates expected to participate, making it one of the largest MICE events held in Sri Lanka this year.

“Hosting this event in Sri Lanka further demonstrates our commitment to and confidence in the country,” he said.

“This expansion further strengthens AA3 Holdings’ commitment not only to supplying world-class machinery but also to providing the high-calibre engineering support and technical expertise required by modern industries,” said AA3 Holdings Ltd. newly appointed General Manager Prasanna Katuwandeniya.