Curiouser and curiouser!

Former Army Commander Field Marshal Sarath Fonseka is in the news again. He has launched a propaganda offensive to vilify the Rajapaksa family as a bunch of traitors who cut secret deals with the LTTE even at the height of the Vanni war. He has claimed that during the final phase of the war, the then President Mahinda Rajapaksa declared a ceasefire in a bid to allow Prabhakaran and other LTTE seniors to escape; the army went ahead and eliminated the LTTE leadership, bringing the war to a successful conclusion. The Rajapaksas have refused to respond to Fonseka’s allegations; their spokesman, former MP Sanjeewa Edirimanna, has said they do not take Fonseka’s utterances seriously.

Fonseka’s aforesaid claim has given rise to some questions. Is he of the view that there was no proper political leadership for the war against the LTTE, and the Rajapaksa government only struck deals with Prabhakaran? Did the army defy government orders during the final phase of the Vanni war to eliminate the LTTE leadership? If it is true that the Rajapaksas sought to spare Prabhakaran and other LTTE leaders, how come they have incurred the wrath of the pro-LTTE groups and the western governments sympathetic to the influential LTTE fronts?

One may recall that towards the closing stages of the Vanni war, the US and its western allies made a determined bid to pressure President Rajapaksa to stop military operations before the army delivered a decapitating blow to the LTTE. Their efforts were in vain as President Rajapaksa did not give in to their pressure. It has now been revealed that he even avoided calls from some western leaders towards the end of the war. In 2009, the then British Foreign Secretary David Miliband and his French counterpart, Bernard Kouchner, rushed here to have a ceasefire declared so as to ensure Prabhakaran’s safety, but they had to return empty-handed. If the Rajapaksa government had sought to suspend military operations, with the western government going all out to save Prabhakaran, would the army have been able to go on fighting?

Most of all, if the army had destroyed the LTTE leadership under Fonseka’s command despite the Rajapaksa government’s efforts to allow Prabhakaran and others to flee, would the US and its allies have backed Fonseka in the 2010 presidential race and launched an international campaign against the Rajapaksas?

One may recall that during his presidential election campaign in 2009, Fonseka, in an interview with The Sunday Leader newspaper, alleged that the LTTE leaders who came out, carrying white flags, to surrender to the army had been shot dead at the behest of Defence Secretary Gotabaya Rajapaksa. How can Fonseka reconcile this particular allegation with his claim that the Rajapaksas tried to save the LTTE leaders?

Moreover, if Fonseka had ordered the elimination of the LTTE leadership in defiance of President Rajapaksa’s efforts to stop the war, would the pro-LTTE political parties have thrown their weight behind him in the 2010 presidential race? Fonseka won in almost all electorates in the North and the East.

Former President Mahinda Rajapaksa receives a large number of visitors daily at his private residence in Tangalle. The government has provided the SLPP supporters with a fresh rallying point by depriving Mahinda of his entitlements as a former President and causing him to leave his official residence in Colombo. Mahinda’s Tangalle residence attracted huge crowds following the 2015 regime change. The NPP and its allies are apparently trying to vilify Mahinda as a traitor in a bid to turn public opinion against him. Whether they will succeed in their endeavour remains to be seen.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.