Hong Kong’s SiS Group takes up  controlling stake in Gestetner of Ceylon

From left: SiS Directors Lim Hwee Noi and Lim Hwee Hai, SiS Chairman and Gestetner of Ceylon incoming Chairman Lim Kiah Meng, Gestetner of Ceylon outgoing Chairman Sayed Jamaldeen Anzsar, and Director A.R. Rasiah

SiS International Holdings Ltd., (SiS) recently invested in a controlling 50.01% stake in Gestetner of Ceylon PLC (Gestetner), a leading player in the office automation sector in Sri Lanka, through World Elite Ltd., one of its Hong Kong-based subsidiaries for Rs. 318.655 million.

SiS Chairman and incoming Chairman of Gestetner Lim Kiah Meng said: “Sri Lanka’s resilient and growing economy, along with increasing demand for office automation and IT services, presents a strategic opportunity for us to strengthen our regional footprint. Gestetner’s strong market position, established brand equity, and proven operational integrity align perfectly with SiS’ values and vision. By combining our regional expertise with Gestetner’s local market knowledge, we aim to deliver innovative solutions and create sustainable value for businesses in Sri Lanka so as to enhance shareholder value for both SiS and Gestetner.”

Founded in Singapore in 1983 and started as a distributor of IT products, SiS International Holdings Limited has been listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange since 1992. Today, it has grown to become a dynamic leading distribution company with the largest network across five countries in Asia Pacific. Over the years, it has also successfully expanded into investments in technology and securities, real estate investment, and asset management segments.

SiS comprises 3 listed investee companies, which are SiS Distribution (Thailand) Public Co. Ltd., which is listed in the Stock Exchange of Thailand since 2004, a leading IT distributor in Thailand, distributing a wide range of products, including computers, peripherals, smartphones, office automation equipment, and value-added solutions such as cloud services and security systems, IT Consultants Public Limited Company, which is listed in Dhaka and Chittagong Stock Exchanges since 2016, a market leader in end-to-end payment solutions in Bangladesh, providing world-class payment infrastructure, services, and technology to banks, governments, and financial as well as non-financial institutions and SiS Mobile Holdings Limited, which is listed in the Main Board of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange since 2015, one of the Hong Kong’s leading mobile phone distributors, leveraging extensive distribution channels to serve the market effectively.

Gestetner of Ceylon Plc, established in 1964 and based in Colombo, is a pioneer in Sri Lanka’s office automation industry. Evolving from the legacy of the iconic ‘Roneo’ machine, the company imports, distributes, and services office equipment and IT products from global brands such as Ricoh, BARCO, Dynabook, and BenQ. It also provides IT and document management solutions, along with outsourced printing, finance, and accounting services. Renowned for reliability, innovation, and service excellence, Gestetner remains a trusted leader in business technology solutions in Sri Lanka.