22A poses serious threat to democracy: GL

Colombo, Aug. 11 (Daily Mirror) - The proposed 22nd Amendment to the Constitution poses a serious threat to human rights, the role of the Opposition and Sri Lanka’s democratic institutions, former Foreign Minister Prof. G.L. Peiris has warned.

Speaking at a media briefing held by the People’s United Opposition at its Office in Colombo yesterday, he said the Opposition would use all available democratic and legal means to thwart the enactment of the amendment.

He said the amendment, which has been gazetted, went far beyond extending the retirement age of judges by two years and could ultimately pave the way for extensions of the presidential and parliamentary terms.

“This is an extremely dangerous amendment. Its consequences are too severe to assess,” he said.

Peiris also criticised the Government for allegedly failing to respond to concerns raised by the Mahanayake Theras of the Malwatte and Asgiri Chapters.

He said the Mahanayake Theras had conveyed their concerns to the President, but had not received even an acknowledgement of their letter.

Referring to Article 9 of the Constitution, which gives foremost place to Buddhism, Peiris questioned whether this was an appropriate manner in which to treat the Mahanayake Theras.

He also said the Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL), which represents around 26,000 lawyers, had sought an opportunity to meet the President and present its views on the amendment, but had not been granted such an opportunity.

According to Peiris, the BASL had also sought a meeting with Justice Minister Harshana Nanayakkara, but the meeting was granted only after the Cabinet had taken a decision on the matter.

He accused the Government of avoiding public dialogue and said the Government's justification that the amendment was necessary to clear the backlog of cases was not convincing.

“Giving judges two additional years will not mean they will hear twice the number of cases,” he said.

Prof. Peiris argued that speeding up the judicial process required strengthening institutions including the Attorney General’s Department, Government Analyst’s Department and Criminal Investigation Department, as well as introducing procedural reforms.

He said there was a disconnect between the problem of case backlogs and the proposed solution of extending judges’ terms.

He said that the Government had not raised the issue of judicial case backlogs when it came to power two years ago.

He said the Government had instead promised to abolish the executive presidency, reform the electoral system and introduce a new Constitution, but those commitments were now no longer being discussed.

Peiris said the Government had secured a two-thirds majority in Parliament based on those promises and expressed hope that the public would eventually make use of the opportunity to hold the Government accountable for them.