Welcome bid to tackle rolling death traps

The National Council for Road Safety (NCRS) is reportedly planning to launch a countrywide campaign to inspect vehicles in the public transport sector. This is something long overdue. The police, politicians and transport authorities spring into action in the aftermath of a tragic accident and formulate strategies to ensure road safety, but they lose interest in their ad hoc initiatives, with the passage of time. Road safety programmes should be sustained over the long term to produce the desired results.

Following the tragic Garandi Ella bus crash last year, transport authorities took action to ramp up vehicle roadworthiness and passenger safety regulations. They ordered mandatory condition checks on buses to prevent mechanical defects and driver fatigue from endangering the lives of passengers. But nothing has since been heard of that vehicle inspection programme.

There have been a couple of tragic road accidents during the past several days. Two lives were lost on Sunday when a car collided with a moving truck in Matara. Road fatality statistics are chilling. The police recorded 2,231 fatal accidents and 2,341 deaths in 2023, and the number of fatal accidents increased to 2,403, with 2,521 deaths, the following year. Last year, 2,597 fatal accidents claimed 2,746 lives. Road accidents in Sri Lanka claim an average of 2,500 to 2,700 lives annually.

Announcing that the inspection of public transport vehicles will get underway in September, the NCRS has identified drivers’ negligence and mechanical defects in vehicles as leading causes of road accidents. True, undisciplined drivers and vehicle defects are responsible for road accidents. However, there are other causative factors that must not be overlooked if roads are to be made safe. The causes of road accidents in Sri Lanka, identified by road safety experts, include speeding, distractions, recklessness, fatigue, driving under the influence of alcohol or narcotics, inclement weather, inadequate road conditions, tailgating, improper lane changes, inexperience of drivers, overtaking dangerously, poor visibility, unroadworthy vehicles, lack of proper road signage, and jaywalking. One of these factors or a combination of them could lead to road accidents. Hence, a campaign to make roads safe should not be limited to drug screening and vehicle inspections.

Most buses operating in Sri Lanka are not purpose-built. They are truck chassis fitted with passenger vehicle bodies and seats. One wonders whether this could be the reason why bus owners and their workers treat passengers like cargo. Successive governments have not done anything about this issue though experts have pointed out that ‘truck-chassis buses’ cannot provide the comfort, stability and safety of the buses built specifically for transporting people. In this country, transporting cattle in cramped conditions is a punishable offence. The police take trucks with cattle packed tightly in them into custody and prosecute their drivers and owners––and rightly so. But no such action is taken against overcrowded buses.

The NCRS programme to inspect public transport vehicles should be coupled with regular random drug screening. Some bus and truck drivers are addicted to drugs. According to media reports, a raid at the Bastian Mawatha private bus terminal in Colombo some time ago, revealed that nearly 18 percent of the drivers and conductors were under the influence of narcotic drugs. Similar inspections in Piliyandala, Horana, Nugegoda and Navinna also resulted in the arrest of several drivers and conductors who tested positive for substances such as heroin, cannabis and crystal methamphetamine, commonly known as “ice”. Truck drivers must also be subjected to regular random drug screening. They are also responsible for many road accidents.

The NCRS vehicle inspection programme is bound to run into stiff resistance from the private bus operators who have become a law unto themselves. Many passenger buses, both private and state-owned, are badly maintained and therefore unroadworthy. Truckers are also likely to protest. It is hoped that the transport authorities and the police will have the courage to tell such bus and truck operators where to get off.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.