Japan donates seven buses to Sri Lanka

Colombo, Sep. 2 (Daily Mirror) - Japan has donated seven low-floor buses to Sri Lanka to support the development of public transport services, under the ongoing development cooperation between the two countries.

The buses, jointly donated by the Government of Japan and the people of Yokohama, were officially handed over to the Sri Lankan Government today (September 2) by Japanese Ambassador to Sri Lanka Akio Isomata.

The buses were handed over to Transport, Highways and Urban Development Minister Bimal Ratnayake at the joint depot of the Sri Lanka Transport Board and Lanka Metro Transit (Pvt.) Ltd. in Battaramulla, Thalangama.

The seven buses will be added to the Metro Bus Service, which was introduced to improve urban public transport services. The existing service operating in Colombo and its suburbs currently has 10 buses.

Lanka Metro Transit plans to add another 104 buses before the end of September, increasing the total fleet to 121 buses.

The company has allocated Rs. 800 million for the project in 2026 and plans to provide Rs. 267.5 million in equity capital in 2027 to further streamline its operations.

Speaking at the handover ceremony, Minister Ratnayake said the Government was committed to people-centred development and implementing sustainable projects that benefit the public.

“It has been two years since we took over this country as a government. The spirit of this government is to launch people-centric development and sustainable projects that benefit the common people,” he said.

He also stressed the importance of working for the benefit of others and fulfilling one’s responsibilities towards society.

Japanese Embassy officials, representatives of the Kaduwela Municipal Council, senior officials of the Ministry of Transport, Highways and Urban Development, the Department of Motor Traffic, Road Development Authority, Sri Lanka Transport Board, National Transport Commission and Lanka Metro Transit were also present at the ceremony.