Cultivation investment firms used public funds for other businesses: CBSL Governor

Colombo, Oct. 1 (Daily Mirror) - Central Bank Governor Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe yesterday said certain companies that had obtained hard-earned money from the public as investments in cultivation projects had used the funds to launch newspapers, supermarkets and tourism businesses, while also organising shows and sponsoring cricket matches.

He said that, on some occasions, portions of the money had been given as gifts to artistes, while other funds had been used for advertising.

The Governor also said the money paid by these companies to certain social media influencers to promote cultivation investments was also money hard-earned by the public.

He said the influencers had spoken not on behalf of the public, but on behalf of the companies that had paid them.

Dr. Weerasinghe said the Central Bank had recently suspended only accounts through which illegal deposits had been accepted.

He stressed that the Central Bank had never suspended any cultivation investment accounts and, therefore, the companies could not claim that they were unable to make payments because their accounts had been suspended by the Central Bank.

He said the Central Bank had repeatedly warned the public not to be deceived by companies accepting deposits as cultivation investments.

However, as investments received by these companies had declined, they had been unable to repay the money owed to earlier depositors, he said.

The Governor also pointed out that the companies were unable to pay returns of 40 percent without obtaining new deposits.

He said accounts through which illegal deposits had been accepted were suspended so that the funds could be distributed among depositors following the conclusion of legal proceedings.

Dr. Weerasinghe said the cultivation investment companies would be asked to come before the law and submit a plan on how they intended to repay to the public the deposits they had accepted illegally, if they did not want to face the same fate as pyramid scheme operators in the past.