Colombo: Port of Call

I was pleasantly surprised to be invited to the launch of a book by an Indian writer recording visits to Colombo, evidently a labour of love by someone fascinated by this country and the range of visitors it hosted in the heyday of the British empire.

The first visit chronologically that it deals with was that of the American philanthropist Andrew Carnegie, in 1879. He in fact landed in Galle, though in his introduction Kamalakaran explains how the port of Colombo was developed during this period so that it soon became practically the only harbour used by passenger liners.

The first visit described in the book was that of the Thai prince Chakrabongse who came here in 1896. He was the son of King Chulalongkorn, and was just 13-years old when he came, on his way to school in England. There are touching extracts from his letters to his father, to whom he seems to have been very close, though he was his 40th child.

He was treated with honours by the British government, and had a meeting with Governor Havelock, in Kandy where the Governor had gone to arrange for a ball in celebration of Queen Victoria’s 77th birthday. But of course the main purpose of his visit to Kandy was to visit the Temple of the Tooth, though he was not impressed by the temple, which was crowded, nor by the Tooth, which he was allowed to view.

The following year his father arrived, and also went to Kandy, but felt insulted by the manner in which he was received. This is recorded also in another book I had just read, Locations of Buddhism: Colonialism and Modernity in Sri Lanka, by an American scholar, Anne M Blackburn. That suggests that the brusque refusal by ‘a Kandyan aristocrat by the name of Panobokke’ to let him touch the tooth led to bad feeling. He took back the gifts he had brought, and this put paid to the efforts of Blackburn’s main protagonist Hikkaduwe Sumangala and other monks to get the Thai king involved in the administration of Buddhist orders in Ceylon. Blackburn notes that it is possible Panabokke’s insult was deliberate, since the Kandyan aristocracy wanted no challenge to their domination of Buddhist orders.

I had had no idea previously that the Thai monarchy had been so keen on the Temple of the Tooth, though this made sense, given that the Siyam Nikaya had been started with support from Thailand. And there was another Thai prince, which prompts a fascinating account by Kamalakaran of him being sent for military training in Russia, and marrying a Russian lady, though that marriage ended in divorce. In the first account in the book, the glimpse offered of the relations between the king and his son was delightful.

That account is preceded as noted by an account of how Colombo developed, and its burgeoning reputation as an attractive destination for tourists. Kamalakaran has obviously done a great deal of research, and this introduction – as indeed the rest of the book – is full of quotations from the writings of visitors. These include not only tourists, but also journalists, who celebrate the place, beginning with a 1851 article in a South Carolina paper.

The introduction also has a section on the arrival of the missionaries, a practice begun by Americans, though turned on its head with the mission to revive Buddhism of Colonel Olcott. And there is mention of the Salvation Army, which returns again and again in the descriptions of visitors in the rest of the book, their marching and the fact that they dressed, even the women, in Ceylonese costumes.

Apart from surprise at the apparitions presented by the Salvation Army, Kamalakaran cites the responses of several visitors to the scenes on the streets of Ceylon, fascinated as they were by the costumes and also the hairstyles of the men, with their tortoise shell combs.

Amongst the well known visitors Kamalakaran talks about are Don Bradman, the future Emperor Hirohito, Arthur Conan Doyle, Mark Twain, Mahatma Gandhi, Orabi Pasha and Anton Chekhov. I have mentioned these in the order in which they occur, which highlights a weakness of the book, since putting the visitors in chronological order instead of zigzagging across the centuries would have given a better idea of changes that had occurred during the nearly 70 years the book covers.

Orabi Pasha was not really a visitor, for he had been sent into exile here by the British from Egypt, after a rebellion against their creature the Khedive whose Prime Minister he had been. Understandably enough, having been forced to spend 18 years in Ceylon, he was far less enthusiastic about the place than others showcased in the book. He found the humidity insupportable and after nine long years he was moved to Kandy, where he got better.

He came with his family, but then had children by ‘Sinhalese wives’ but there is no trace now of such progeny. What has lasted is Zahira College, which he inspired leading Muslims to found, at a time when Buddhists and Hindus were also developing schools to counteract Christian influence.

Most visitors stayed when in Colombo at either the Galle Face or the Grand Oriental Hotel, both of which have plaques to the more famous amongst them. Most visited the Temple of the Tooth, and most were impressed, though some such as Doyle were not, the ‘perpetual demand for small coins’ being an irritant. But those who stayed there were generally pleased with the Queen’s Hotel, and there are accounts too of being received, royalty that is – including the future Czar Nicholas of Russia though the star of his section is the nobleman who came with him and recorded the visit – at the Governor’s residences in Colombo or Kandy.

There are accounts of lesser known travellers as well, though I suppose the philanthropist Andrew Carnegies is quite famous. And the prolific Belgian traveller Jules Leclercq and the Russian philosopher Nicholas Roerich are not unknown. But there are also two obscure American ladies, Mary Thorn Carpenter who travelled on her own while in her twenties, and the even younger Jane Sherman, a dancer.

Sherman’s trip is the most unusual of those in the book, for she was on a tour of Asia with an obscure dance troupe. The trip had been exhausting, for they were on a shoestring budget, but Sherman was not at all well when she got to Colombo so that she could not perform, which meant as Karunakaran puts it that she had a respite while here, and thoroughly enjoyed her stay.

There is very little of Karunakaran himself in the book, though the introduction makes it clear that he has thoroughly studied his subject, and applied himself to the city, the port, and the various reactions of the travellers he has selected with both dedication and affection.

For the most part he is content to let his characters speak for themselves, and has selected extracts from diaries that bring out their individuality. As we saw with the Thai prince, he notes the affection between father and son, and he deals with a similar subject in describing the worries Mrs Bradman felt about her husband. Oddly enough, what emerges most strongly from the account of Bradman is how sick he was so often, on the ship when he first came over, and in Ceylon too, so that once he was unable to take the field, to the chagrin of his enthusiastic supporters in Colombo.

There are interesting vignettes, as when Carnegie talks about the caste issue, the peraheras specially arranged for distinguished visitors by the British when they were ecstatic about the stately caparisoned elephants, the excavations just beginning at Anuradhapura, which led Leclercq to a remarkable perception of just how grand the place and its buildings had been.

And Karunakaran does make the occasional very pertinent observation. When Roerich writes about a port full of Europeans – ‘The policeman is Irish. A French peddler. A Greek with postcards. Dutch tea-peddlers. An Italian chauffeur. But where are the Singhalese? Have they all emigrated to Europe?’ – Karunakaran questions the ‘widely believed narratives of all Europeans on the island living in affluence while working-class locals struggled to make ends meet’.

He is harsh about what he sees as Carpenter’s racism, and asks how ‘the daughter of someone who supported the abolition of slavery in the United States’ could harbour such deep racial prejudice? But even she is more positive than otherwise about the beauties of the island, and also of its children, while he records the ecstasy of others, in particular Mark Twain who said he had spent the most enchanting day of his life in Ceylon, and loved everything – except the prim European clothes of girls marching out of a missionary school. He much preferred the boy with just a twine string round his waist, which he thought ‘a pleasant contrast with the odious flummery in which the little Sunday-school dowdies were masquerading’.

The account of Gandhi’s visit covers a lot of political activity, but what I found most interesting was the account of a meeting with ladies he had looked forward to, thinking there would be lots of them. Instead he found a small group of society ladies in a ‘fashionable drawing room’, and feeling the ladies themselves were not at fault he gave them a talk which led his secretary to write ‘I do not think that the friends had ever had in their lives a more uncomfortable half hour’.

All in all a fascinating account of different perspectives on this country, and we must be grateful to the writer for having put it all so lovingly together.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.