MAS wins multiple honours at National Cleaner Production Awards 2025

South Asian apparel-tech conglomerate, MAS Holdings won recognition for its commitment to sustainable and ethical production at the recently concluded National Cleaner Production Awards 2025.

The awards were presented in Colombo under the patronage of Industry and Entrepreneurship Development, Minister Sunil Handunnetti.

MAS received Gold, Silver, Bronze and Merit awards in the Manufacturing and Textile sectors under the Large-Scale Manufacturing Organisations category. These awards recognise the continued efforts of MAS teams in improving operational efficiency, reducing environmental impact, and integrating circularity across the company’s value chain.

In the Manufacturing Large category – Apparel sector, Silueta, Biyagama won a Gold Award, while MAS Intimates Slimtex Division, Kuliyapitiya and Bodyline, Horana received Silver Awards. Additionally, a Bronze was awarded to MAS Active Kreeda Shadeline, Mahiyanganaya, and Contourline Division, Pallekele secured a Merit Award.

In the Manufacturing Large category – Textile sector, MAS Active Linea Intimo, Biyagama won a Gold Award, while MAS Fabrics Intimo Division, Thulhiriya received a Silver Award. Noyon Lanka, Biyagama also secured a Merit Award in the category.

Organised by the National Cleaner Production Centre (NCPC) of Sri Lanka in collaboration with the Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Ministry, the awards program acknowledges industries that demonstrate leadership in cleaner production and responsible resource management. Since launching in 2007, the awards have sought to encourage and showcase Sri Lankan businesses to strengthen sustainable consumption and production practices across manufacturing, services, and public institutions.

These achievements reflect MAS’ continued work to shape a more responsible manufacturing ecosystem in Sri Lanka, while also serving as testament to their broader Plan for Change initiative that just announced their 2030 goals. Plan for Change 2030 is a comprehensive sustainability strategy aimed at transforming MAS Holdings’ operations across products, lives, and the planet.

The company remains focused on advancing cleaner production, strengthening environmental stewardship, and contributing to the country’s broader shift towards resource efficiency and circular practices.