‘The Thursday Murder Club’

Though murder mysteries that are also comic novels are not very common, I have read quite a few of them recently, in two separate series. The first was the books by Caryl Brahms and S J Simon, the first book in which I described a couple of weeks back.

The second series of murders and comedy together is a recent one by a television personality called Richard Osman. The first book is called  The Thursday Murder Club and gives its title to the series, of which I believe about five books have appeared already. The Club is a group of friends in a retirement home who meet once a week to look at unsolved cases, and soon find themselves trying to solve those which have loose ends which they feel they will be able to tie up.

The story of the first book begins with the recruitment of a retired nurse, Joyce, to take the place of a retired police officer, Penny, whose mind and body were in terminal decline. Penny and her friend Elizabeth, a retired spy, had set up the club, with an accountant called Ibrahim and a trade unionist called Ron. They had worked on Penny’s old files, and tried to work out the murderer in unsolved cases, but the one with which the story opens, as to which Joyce was called on to help, was new to them. It was about a girl who had bled to death in her boyfriend’s arms, and Joyce’s account of how long this would have taken seemed to confirm the view that the boyfriend had done it, not a burglar who had got away.

The boyfriend had vanished, getting away from Penny’s squad car when he was being taken for questioning, and was never seen again, though the consensus of the Club was that he would not have been convicted anyway. But before they have decided to move on to something else, they are confronted with a murder in their midst, of the builder, Tony Curran, who had worked for the developer of the Rest Home, Ian Ventham. This happens after an argument, which Ventham does not admit to, but which was about him dismissing Tony, having decided that the partnership on the basis of which they had worked lost him too much of the profits he anticipated.

The writer, Richard Osman, moves between third person narratives and Joyce’s first-person account in a diary, and he had told us that Ian was frightened that Tony, who had a criminal record, might kill him. Though the argument ends without any violence, we move to Tony going home and planning Ian’s death, but then he himself is murdered. The killer leaves with the body an old picture of Tony with Ron’s son Jason, a professional wrestler who had been involved in minor criminal activity, and another hireling of Tony, Bobby Tanner, who had vanished.

The first suspect is of course Ian, but then he too is murdered. This is during a fracas when he sent his new builder, Bogdan, and diggers, to destroy the cemetery where the nuns, who had occupied the site of the home previously, were buried. The residents have gathered to protest, and some have chained themselves to the gate into the cemetery, but when he pushes a priest who had come to see him earlier, and he falls, all the residents pile onto him. And one of them pushes a needle into him, to inject him with fentanyl, so that he dies almost immediately.

At the time of the second murder, that of the property developer Ian Ventham, a third murder is discovered. His builder Bogdan, who had thought to make a start on digging up the graves while the fracas with the mechanised diggers went on at the gate, had found a body in the oldest grave of all. He covers this up, but in time he reveals the fact to Elizabeth, with whose husband Stephen he had begun to play chess when he called on her. Stephen, her third husband, is losing his wits, but he still has plenty of them left, and in fact he works out who killed Curran, on the basis of what he had heard from Elizabeth.

After she has established, with the help of a forensics expert, that the body in the grave dates from fifty years back, and is that of a male with a gunshot injury in his leg, Elizabeth informs the police of its existence. The Detective in charge of the case, Chris Hudson, is furious, but realizes there is nothing he can do. He has grown to be graceful about the involvement of the club, and is even grateful when they trace Bobby Tanner.

Tanner has a new life, and the Club maintains secrecy but brings him in to see Hudson, who sees no case against him. By now he is convinced that Ventham’s killer was Matthew Mackie, the priest whom Ventham had pushed, and who Elizabeth has discovered is not a priest. By summoning him to the old chapel, to hear a confession, though she does not mention whose this will be, she gets from him the reason for his obsession with the graveyard. She confesses to having murdered someone and put the body in the grave, but he tells her he does not believe her, and when she tells him she knew he had worked there in 1870, he relates his own rather sad but not criminal story.

Another red herring has been provided by Bernard, whom Joyce rather fancies, though he seems impervious to anyone, committed as he is to his dead Indian wife. But the Club finds out the reason for his obsession with a bench near the graveyard, from which he could see what was going on there, though it turns out that it was the bench that was more important to him.

When the Club finds someone else who had been near the site in the seventies, they realise they have solved the case. This was Penny’s husband John Gray, who tells them that, having put a horse out of its misery, he did the same for its owner who was also in a state of despair. But Elizabeth does not believe him, and then the truth comes out, taking the novel back to its beginnings, and the boyfriend who had been invalided out of the army, because he had a gunshot wound in his leg.

Far too many coincidences to be plausible, far too many guilty secrets to be credible, but that is not the point. The book is a splendid romp, and the manoeuvers of the Club to get information, including through helping a constable who found routine work tiresome to be put on the murder case – where she is a source of great comfort to Hudson – are delightful. I can only hope I get to see the film, which has a stellar cast.

Saudi Arabia sets new benchmark in Hajj management as 1.7 million pilgrims complete sacred journey

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.