David Pieris Group expands global footprint with investment in Dubai-based Navire Logistics

The David Pieris Group continues to strengthen its international presence with the acquisition of 50% ownership in Navire Logistics Services L.L.C, a reputed logistics company based in Dubai and Oman.

This strategic move marks a significant milestone in the Group’s journey towards expanding its operations beyond Sri Lanka and positioning itself in the international markets.

In Sri Lanka, the Group’s logistics arm, D P Logistics Ltd. (DPL), has already established itself as a comprehensive logistics solutions provider—covering warehousing, transportation, freight forwarding, project logistics, inland distribution and custom house brokering.

DPL currently ranks among the top 10 players in warehousing and 3PL operations and holds one of the largest container fleets amongst the logistics companies in the country. Despite operating in a highly fragmented freight forwarding market, DPL continues to capture a growing share, reinforcing its reputation as one of the very few local companies with expertise across all logistics disciplines.

David Pieris Group also acquired in 2022, Pulsar Shipping Agencies Ltd., the shipping arm of Expolanka Holdings PLC to expand its Logistics and Shipping Cluster into ship agency, husbandry services and marine logistics.

Leveraging this strong domestic foundation, DPL has now extended its capabilities to the international stage through its partnership with Navire Logistics Services L.L.C. The company’s expertise in custom house brokering, freight forwarding, cargo consolidation, warehousing, and transport solutions will be integrated into Navire Logistics’ operations, enhancing service quality and efficiency across the Middle East and South Asia.

The investment also extends to operations in Oman through a fully owned subsidiary, with further expansion plans already underway to establish operations in Saudi Arabia, Thailand, and India—strengthening the Group’s regional logistics network.

D P Logistics Ltd., Managing Director and CEO Kalum Katipearachchi said: “With more than 60 dedicated employees in the Middle-Eastern region, we are delivering operational excellence across borders—offering practical, seamless solutions to complex supply chain needs of our diverse customers. Our team’s professionalism, passion and commitment to customer satisfaction continue to drive our success as we integrate Sri Lankan logistics expertise with the world.”

“Integrity and precision are at the heart of everything we do. Whether it’s handling local logistics or global freight forwarding, our teams ensure each operation is managed with meticulous attention to detail and unwavering reliability,” he added.

Through this international expansion, David Pieris Logistics and Shipping Cluster is poised to become an international logistics and shipping services provider, capable of meeting diverse customer needs both domestically and