Dialog Surpasses 1,000 5G Sites, Strengthening Nationwide 5G Coverage

Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s #1 connectivity provider, announced that its 5G network has surpassed 1,000 live sites, marking a major milestone in the rapid expansion of next-generation mobile connectivity across the island. The milestone reflects Dialog’s continued progress in line with rollout commitments set by the Telecommunications Regulatory Commission of Sri Lanka (TRCSL), with the company already achieving the 2026 rollout targets ahead of schedule. This further strengthens Dialog 5G Ultra as the country’s fastest-growing 5G network, supporting Sri Lanka’s ongoing digital transformation and future-ready ambitions.

Building on its commercial launch of 5G with over 220 sites serving more than 1.5 million subscribers, Dialog has scaled its network at pace, extending coverage across all districts. This continued expansion strengthens the foundation for more reliable, high‑speed connectivity, enabling individuals, enterprises, and communities to engage more meaningfully in an increasingly digital economy.

Commenting on the milestone, Supun Weerasinghe, Director / Group Chief Executive of Dialog Axiata PLC, said, “Surpassing 1,000 5G sites marks an important step in strengthening Sri Lanka’s digital infrastructure. At Dialog, our focus goes beyond expanding network reach — it is about enabling new possibilities across communities and industries, empowering enterprises to innovate, and supporting the country’s long‑term digital and economic progress. As we continue to invest in next‑generation connectivity, we remain committed to building a digitally inclusive future and unlocking the full potential of 5G for Sri Lanka.”

As the first operator to commercially enable 5G in Sri Lanka, Dialog continues to lead the evolution of mobile connectivity, building on its legacy of introducing 2G, 3G, and 4G technologies to the country. Through sustained investment in world‑class infrastructure, Dialog 5G Ultra is designed to support future‑ready applications ranging from enhanced consumer experiences to enterprise innovation and emerging digital ecosystems.

Customers with 5G‑compatible smartphones can experience Dialog 5G Ultra by being within a 5G coverage area, enjoying enhanced speeds and next‑generation performance. To further broaden access to 5G technology, Dialog has introduced the Dialog A76 5G, the country’s most affordable 5G smartphone, priced at LKR 35,999, alongside flexible payment options that make upgrading to 5G more accessible.

Aligned with its brand promise of “The Future. Today.”, Dialog continues to play a pivotal role in shaping Sri Lanka’s digital landscape by extending advanced connectivity nationwide and supporting long‑term innovation, inclusion, and economic growth. For more information, please visit www.dialog.lk/5g

European Union mobilises 2.6 million Euro to strengthen civil society in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.