Serendib Flour Mills spreads joy on World Children’s Day with children of Digana Rehabilitation Hospital

Serendib Flour Mills Pvt Ltd, under the commitment to nourish lives and empower communities, joined hands with the Rehabilitation Hospital, Digana to celebrate ‘World Children’s Day’ with children of special needs.

Serendib Flour Mills, believes every child deserves to feel valued, celebrated, and supported. On World Children’s Day the company was privileged to honour the children’s courage and joy, contribute to their journey sharing in the happiness together with their families.

The celebration, held at the Kengalle Maha Vidyalaya Auditorium, was a heartfelt occasion dedicated to recognizing the resilience, creativity, and talents of children who receive treatment at the hospital. The event was organized in collaboration with the parents of the children with special heeds, highlighting the spirit of unity and compassion World Children’s Day symbolises.

As part of the program, children showcased their unique talents through performances and activities, reminding all present of the limitless potential within every child. To make the day even more memorable, Serendib Flour Mills presented school bags to all the children.

The event was supported by the dedicated medical team of the Rehabilitation Hospital, including Dr. Priyanka Kumarasinghe, Hospital Director, Dr. Nihal Weerasooriya, Provincial Director, Health Services, Central Province, Dr. Suranga Fernando, Consultant Community Physician, and Dr. Randini Wijewardena, Consultant Paediatrician.

The celebration reiterates Serendib Flour Mills’ ongoing commitment to corporate social responsibility, extending its role further than business to touch lives and build a more inclusive future for Sri Lanka’s children.

Ceylinco Life’s Green Club drives meaningful sustainability impact in first half of 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.