Worsening water woes

Water cuts are currently on in some parts of the Colombo District due to the prevailing dry spell. Initially, some suburbs of Colombo were left without water for as long as 24 hours at a stretch, and people protested. Subsequently, the durations of water cuts were reduced. However, people were seen protesting in some areas yesterday as well. The situation is likely to take a turn for the worse throughout the country unless the reservoir catchments receive sufficient rain.

Sri Lanka’s water problem is far more serious than it looks. It is worsening rapidly due to climate change, which disrupts the global water cycle, causing floods and droughts often in the same regions at different times of the year. The acceleration of evaporation due to global warming takes its toll on the snowpack, shifting rainfall patterns the world over, adversely impacting fresh water supplies to billions of people. Hence the need for Sri Lanka to address the water issues related to climate change, as a national priority, and formulate a comprehensive mitigation strategy urgently.

Experts have stressed the need to build the country’s resilience against drought while taking action to conserve and manage water resources efficiently. Among the urgent measures they have called for are fixing leaks in the mains, promoting water-efficient irrigation systems, appliances and industrial processes through incentives and regulation, and, most of all, rainwater harvesting.

Prerequisites for building national resilience against drought include substantial investment in desalination technology mainly for the benefit of the coastal communities, restoring wetlands, forests and watersheds to facilitate the natural water flow that replenishes underground aquifers. Unfortunately, successive governments have allowed the encroachment on wetlands, forests and other such ecologically sensitive areas. The fate of the Muthurajawela wetland may serve as an example. Climatologists and agricultural scientists have pointed out the need to grow drought-resistant crops and adopt smarter agricultural practices, as farming is believed to account for about 70% of freshwater use across the globe. The situation must be more or less the same here.

Climate change mitigation strategies are resource-intensive and heavily policy driven. A chronic lack of vision and capacity of successive governments and state officials has stood in the way of preparing the country for the challenges from climate change and even the adoption of relatively simple and less resource-intensive methods to help the public overcome their water woes. Their failure to develop rainwater harvesting as a national policy is a case in point. It is high time they focused more on rainwater harvesting, which is technically feasible here, given Sri Lanka’s high rainfall, averaging about 2,000 mm annually, according to the Department of Census and Statistics. Even if a faction of this rainfall can be captured properly, that will help supplement domestic and agricultural water supplies significantly, experts have pointed out. Every rooftop can be turned into an effective catchment area for capturing rainwater, which can be stored to reduce the stress caused by the use of treated water for cleaning, gardening, toilet flushing, etc., to the mains.

There has been a proposal that rainwater harvesting be made mandatory in new buildings, private, public or commercial, by requiring them to have water harvesting systems. Sri Lanka can learn how to enforce rainwater harvesting effectively from countries, such as Germany, India, China, Pakistan and Thailand. It, too, encourages such systems, but that has to be done vigorously through public awareness campaigns, incentives, soft loan schemes, etc. An added advantage of rainwater harvesting is that excess stormwater can be used to recharge wells and replenish aquifers, especially in the dry zone. Such systems will also help improve urban drainage.

Lanka Rainwater Harvesting Forum, a collective of government and non-government institutions, including the National Water Supplies and Drainage Board, has been on a mission to raise public awareness and assist in rainwater harvesting. It will be of tremendous help to launch a national rainwater harvesting programme.

Sri Lankans have evinced a keen interest in the country’s energy security vis-a-vis the West Asian conflict, and the resultant global oil supply disruptions and massive price increases. These days, much is also being spoken about energy conservation. This no doubt is a positive development. However, the country’s long-term water security is no less important and warrants the attention of the public, politicians and policymakers alike.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.