Softlogic Life pioneers AI-powered corporate reporting

Softlogic Life has once again raised the bar for corporate reporting in Sri Lanka with the launch of its 2025 annual report, themed ‘BIG MOVES, BIG IMPACT’, introducing Sri Lanka’s first five-part artificial intelligence (AI)-powered intelligence ecosystem designed to make corporate information smarter, simpler and more accessible to all stakeholders.

The new ecosystem brings together AI-Optimised Annual Intelligence Report, ‘Lifey’ Predictive Intelligence Analyser, Adaptive Intelligence Engine, Annual Report Audio Intelligence and Stakeholder Sentiment Intelligence.

The AI-Optimised Annual Intelligence Report has been designed for a world in which the investors, analysts, researchers and other stakeholders increasingly use AI assistants, large language models and digital financial platforms to discover and analyse corporate information. Through an open, industry-standard connection using Model Context Protocol, external AI systems can connect directly with the annual report and retrieve verified information from the source.

Lifey, Softlogic Life’s Predictive Intelligence Analyser, takes stakeholder engagement beyond conventional search. The users can interact with the annual report by typing or speaking questions and receive clear, contextual responses that can also be read aloud.

The Adaptive Intelligence Engine changes the traditional concept of a one-size-fits-all annual report by allowing the stakeholders to create a version tailored to their own requirements.

Annual Report Audio Intelligence extends accessibility beyond the written report by transforming key financial, strategic and sustainability information into a series of AI-generated audio episodes. Available in 10 languages, the feature allows the stakeholders to engage with Softlogic Life’s performance and strategic direction wherever they are.

The fifth component, Stakeholder Sentiment Intelligence, turns corporate reporting into a two-way engagement platform. The stakeholders can identify their role, provide ratings on areas such as readability, clarity, ease of navigation and usefulness of AI-enabled features and recommend areas for improvement.

AI then analyses the collective feedback to identify stakeholder sentiment, expectations and emerging areas of interest.

Softlogic Life Chief Financial Officer Nuwan Withanage said, “At Softlogic Life, our AI-powered intelligence ecosystem represents a fundamental shift in how we think about reporting, transforming information into intelligence, disclosure into dialogue and hindsight into foresight.”

Softlogic Life EVP and Chief Digital Innovation Saranga Wijayarathne added, “Lifey enables natural-language and voice interaction across more than 70 languages, while the Adaptive Intelligence Engine allows the users to control the perspective, content, depth, style, language and output format of the information they receive.”