NCE launches SLAB-endorsed Certificate of Ethical Trading

The National Chamber of Exporters of Sri Lanka (NCE) has announced the launch of its Sri Lanka Accreditation Board (SLAB)-endorsed Certificate of Ethical Trading (CET) at its 40th Anniversary special celebration and Annual General Meeting.

It marked a momentous step in strengthening the credibility of Sri Lankan exporters in global markets amid growing consciousness for ethical sourcing.

The CET, first introduced by the NCE in 2019, was designed to help exporters respond to growing international expectations around ethical sourcing, sustainability, labour practices, and environmental responsibility. With the new SLAB endorsement, the CET moves into a new phase, offering national accreditation and increased international recognition for Sri Lankan exporters.

NCE President Indhra Kaushal Rajapaksa, stated that the launch of the SLAB-endorsed CET reflects the Chamber’s forward-looking vision to position Sri Lanka as a trusted and responsible sourcing destination in global trade. “In today’s highly competitive and conscious global marketplace, ethical compliance is no longer optional, it is a critical requirement. This certification empowers our exporters to demonstrate their commitment to transparency, sustainability, and responsible business practices, thereby enhancing their credibility and competitiveness internationally,” he said.

NCE Chief Executive Officer and Secretary General Shiham Marikar noted that this ambitious initiative stemmed from a practical challenge faced by Sri Lankan exporters in overseas markets: despite competitive pricing, solid packaging and other product certifications, international buyers were increasingly looking at how businesses operate, their governance, labour practices, and environmental responsibility.

Following this, the NCE introduced the CET in 2019 based on internationally accepted guidelines, offering it initially exclusively to member companies that met the required standards. It covered good governance, sustainability, ethical labor practices, and environmental protection.

“I am happy to say that we are the only private sector chamber that initiated a certification program of this nature, focusing on ethical trading and good governance. The response from exporters exceeded expectations,” Marikar added.

In 2023, the NCE partnered with Ind-Expo Certification Ltd., a leading certification body accredited by the Sri Lanka Accreditation Board, also affiliated with the International Accreditation Forum (IAF), to strengthen the certification process and ensure transparency and credibility. Since then, 109 NCE member companies have obtained certification.

Furthermore, in response to increasing global demand for social accountability and ethical sourcing, the NCE upgraded its flagship certification. Building on the progress, the NCE sought overseas certification body endorsements, which required national-level certification. Hence, the NCE undertook a year-long process to secure national accreditation for the certification.

The process involved a drafting committee with representation from key institutions including the Export Development Board (EDB), Inland Revenue Department (IRD), and Central Environmental Authority (CEA); along with an approval committee including representation from International Labour Organisation – Decent Work Technical Team for South Asia (ILO DWT for South Asia), Central Environmental Authority (CEA), Sustainable Development Council (SDC), United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) and Chartered Institute of Marketing Sri Lanka and the Maldives (CIM).

Marikar described the move to obtain national accreditation as a necessary step to strengthen credibility and international acceptance.

With the SLAB endorsement now in place, all new CET certifications and renewals will carry national accreditation, providing exporters with greater assurance when engaging with overseas buyers.

The SLAB-endorsed CET is expected to support exporters by improving access to global markets, brand reputation and global trust, as well as aligning businesses with international ethical and labour standards. The certification also aims to help exporters demonstrate responsible business practices, compliance and provide a competitive edge at a time when global buyers are increasingly prioritising sustainability and governance standards.

“The NCE encourages exporters to adopt the certification, due to ethical trading standards becoming a key factor in securing international business. “If you do not have this certification, your competitor will. And that gives them a better chance of securing that order,” Marikar added.

The initiative is supported through partnerships with Colombo West International Terminal (CWIT) and Sampath Bank. The launch of the SLAB-endorsed CET at the NCE’s 40th anniversary AGM highlights the Chamber’s continuation of efforts to support Sri Lankan exporters and strengthen the country’s position in global markets.