Better-quality teas command premiums at weekly auction

The auction offerings totalled 5.0 million kilogrammes (M/Kgs), a marginal increase from 4.8 M/Kgs on offer the previous week.

The Ex-Estate offerings comprised of 0.7 M/Kgs, a marginal increase from 0.6 M/Kgs on offer the previous week. The quality was marginally improved.

The Better Westerns – select invoices of the BOP/BOPFs, appreciated by up to Rs.100 per kilogramme and more, whilst the others were firm and dearer to a lesser extent.

In the Below Best category, the select BOP invoices appreciated by up to Rs.100 per kilogramme and more, whilst the others were firm and dearer to a lesser extent.

The corresponding BOPFs followed a similar trend, with select invoices appreciating by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme, whilst the remainder together with the teas at the lower end of the market selling around last week’s levels.

The limited availability of the Nuwara Eliya BOP/BOPFs continued to be sluggish. The Uda Pussellawa prices were disappointing against the backdrop of the plainer quality.

The Uva – Select Best BOPs, were Rs.20-40 per kilogramme dearer, whilst the others were generally firm.

The corresponding BOPFs – better teas, gained by up to Rs.100 per kilogramme, whilst the others were firm and dearer to a lesser extent.

The High and Mid Grown CTC teas sold around last levels, with the select improved invoices appreciating by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme. The corresponding Low Grown types continued to sell well.

The Low Growns totalled approximately 2.4 M/Kgs, with all categories experiencing fair demand.

In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues, the well-made BOP1s together with the teas at the bottom were firm, whilst the balance was easier.

The OP1s, in general, were sold around last week’s level, whilst the Best varieties were lower. The well-made OPs were firm, whilst the balance was easier. A few high-priced OPAs appreciated, whilst the balance declined. The Select Best and Best PEKs were irregular, whilst the balance together with the PEK1s was sold around last.

In the Tippy catalogue, the well-made FBOPs were easier, whilst a few clean leaf Below Best and cleaner teas at the bottom were firm. The balance was lower. The FF1s, in general, were lower.

In the Premium catalogue, the Tippy teas, in general, were easier, whilst the leafier types were firm to selectively dearer.