CA Sri Lanka’s 46th National Conference kicks off to spark global-local synergy

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (CA Sri Lanka) yesterday inaugurated its 46th National Conference of Chartered Accountants, a business summit focused on redefining the nation’s economic trajectory by harnessing global insight for local impact.

Held under the theme “UPRISE – Global Insight >> Local Impact”, the three-day conference, taking place from 8 to 10 October 2025 at the Monarch Imperial, was ceremonially inaugurated yesterday in the presence of global thought leaders, diplomats, corporate leaders, entrepreneurs, industry pioneers, and top-tier professionals.

The conference dubbed as the biggest annual business summit in the country was officially inaugurated by global business leader Minor International Group CEO and Minor Hotels CEO Dillip Rajakarier, in the presence of CA Sri Lanka President Heshana Kuruppu, Vice President Tishan Subasinghe, National Conference Committee Chairman Chamara Abeyrathne, Technical Committee Chairman Dr. Wasaba Jayasekera, and CEO Lakmali Priyangika.

In his opening address, Kuruppu said this year’s theme is a powerful, intentional call to action. “It demands that we, as a nation, rise above current challenges. We must look beyond our shores not to imitate, but to innovate, and to absorb global knowledge and translate it into local action that rebuilds, revitalises, and redefines Sri Lanka.”

“This is where our profession’s most sacred duty resides”, Mr. Kuruppu explained, citing that Chartered Accountants are the guardians of public trust and the independent arbiters of truth in financial reporting. “The numbers we certify are not just ink on paper; they are the foundation upon which investors place their bets on our country’s future. When we sign an audit report, we are not just validating a balance sheet, we are underwriting a piece of Sri Lanka’s credibility,” he said.

Kuruppu added: “Every time we uphold an ethical standard, every time we challenge a questionable practice, every time we insist on transparency, we are not just doing our job, we are fortifying the very pillars of our economy.”

Delivering his speech, Abeyrathne, highlighted the historic turnout emphasising that this year the conference had achieved the highest number of physical delegates in the conference’s history. “Over 2,100 of you are here in person, which is a powerful testament to the unwavering spirit of our community. To the more than 500 delegates joining us virtually from across the globe, a very warm welcome. Together, we are a gathering of over 2,600 strong, forming the largest and most vibrant assembly this conference has ever seen.”

Abeyrathne said that the National Conference, a flagship event of CA Sri Lanka, has for over four and a half decades, been a catalytic force in Sri Lanka›s professional landscape. “But tonight, we are not just continuing a legacy; we are making history.”

Dr. Jayasekera said: “‘UPRISE – Global Insight >> Local Impact’ is more than a theme; it is a matter of national importance. At this critical juncture, with Sri Lanka facing immense challenges that demand courage, vision, and decisive action, Chartered Accountants firmly believe that an uprise is both possible and essential.”

“This conference is built around that very need: to learn, to lead, and to transform. Chartered Accountants must lead this journey with integrity and expertise. Together, let us activate a national movement to build a resilient, thriving economy, to transform challenges into opportunities, and ensure Sri Lanka not only survives but thrives,” Dr. Jayasekera added.

The conference features six dynamic sessions designed to inspire, challenge, and empower Sri Lanka’s business and professional communities.