Former envoy urges govt. to conclude US trade pact to lock in 10% tariff

Former Ambassador Mahinda Samarasinghe says around 90% of the text of the Sri Lanka-US trade agreement has been agreed, although domestic legal processes must still be completed before it is signed and implemented

Almost every country that has finalised an agreement with Washington has had to offer complete or near-complete duty-free access for American exports, he pointed out

Sri Lanka would like a clause similar to one secured by Bangladesh, which offers a zero-rated quota in return for sourcing raw materials such as cotton and fibre from the US

Sri Lanka must conclude its pending trade agreement with the United States in order to lock in the favourable 10 percent tariff rate it currently enjoys, according to former Sri Lankan Ambassador to the United States Mahinda Samarasinghe.

Delivering the keynote address at the 25th anniversary celebrations of the Sri Lanka Institute of Directors (SLiD) in Colombo this week, Samarasinghe, who recently concluded his assignment in Washington, revealed that negotiations were in their final stages, with around 90 percent of the agreement’s content already finalised.

Agreeing on the content in principle is only one step, he explained, as domestic processes are needed to give the agreement legal effect before it can be signed and implemented.

“What I have recommended very strongly to the government before I left was that we need to conclude the agreement so that we can lock in the very favourable tariff rate that Sri Lanka has got up to now,” he said.

“The government is committed to sorting out whatever differences that are there to give and take and come to that agreement so that there is some guarantee that can be given to domestic exporters that that market opportunity is available not only today but moving forward,” he added.

With the US accounting for 25 percent of Sri Lanka’s total exports, protecting the country’s market share there is of vital importance, Samarasinghe observed. When the US administration announced its reciprocal tariffs in April 2025, Sri Lanka was given a 44 percent rate, one of the highest announced at the time.

“It was a do-or-die effort on the part of Sri Lanka to ensure that we get a good deal out of the negotiations that we undertook immediately after getting one of the highest tariff rates back in April 2025,” he recalled.

“We were able, as a result of skillful negotiations, reaching out, getting the right information at the right time, and acting upon it immediately, to bring down the tariff rate from the initial 44 percent to 33 percent, then subsequently to 20 percent, and now at a favourable rate of 10 percent.”

He stressed that this was not the end of the process, pointing out that the 27-member European Union had already finalised its agreement as a bloc, while approximately 50 countries had signed agreements, with some already implementing them.

The baseline requirement in these negotiations was clear, according to Samarasinghe. Every country that finally agreed to sign had to grant either complete or near-complete duty-free access for American exports into its market. Many signatories gave complete access, while some introduced time-bound plans that would eventually lead to complete duty-free access.

Turning to the link between tariffs and geopolitics, he observed that the general consensus was that the US tariff regime was shaped not only by domestic compulsions, such as revenue generation and helping American manufacturers compete, but also by a carrot-and-stick approach.

In what was likely a reference to India, he noted that a neighbouring country faced a 25 percent surcharge on top of its reciprocal tariff in the latter part of 2025 over purchases of cheap Russian oil, bringing its total tariff to 50 percent. That country negotiated its way out of the position and saw the surcharge rolled back in February 2026. Contd. on page 9

Vietnam, meanwhile, faced a 40 percent surcharge linked to transshipment activity. The surcharge was not levied after Vietnam agreed to a rigorous supervision mechanism, with direct consent from the US side, to prevent goods produced in other countries from being transshipped through Vietnam to the US market.

Samarasinghe also highlighted the US decision to negotiate on a one-on-one basis rather than within multilateral frameworks. From the start of the talks, it was made clear that the WTO and other multilateral trade agreements Sri Lanka had signed were not relevant to the tariff negotiations, he recalled.

On supply chains, he drew attention to Bangladesh’s agreement with the US, under which Bangladesh would receive a zero-rated quota, against the 10 percent it currently pays, if it shifted to sourcing raw materials such as cotton and fibre from the US.

“That was very attractive, and this is a clause that Sri Lanka also would like to have because Bangladesh is one of our strongest competitors,” he said, adding that Sri Lanka wanted to retain its competitive position against rival exporters.

Many countries secured favourable rates by committing to major purchases and investments in the US. One East Asian country, likely Japan, agreed to buy US$ 8 billion worth of US agricultural products and, for the first time in its history, allowed US rice imports. Another, likely South Korea, agreed to invest billions of dollars in revitalising the US shipbuilding industry, while a third, likely Taiwan, agreed to shift semiconductor production to the US.

Within the subregion, one country, likely Bangladesh, agreed to buy US$ 3.5 billion worth of Boeing aircraft and secured a government-to-government deal, avoiding the tender process, to buy LNG from an American company over a long period. Another, likely Pakistan, offered American companies concessions for petroleum exploration and agreed to work with the US on rare earths and minerals.

“These are the kinds of deals that were used to leverage the market access that the US was able to give countries that all desperately sought to get. Sri Lanka was no different,” he remarked, adding that Sri Lanka had secured one of the best deals from the negotiations despite not yet signing the agreement.

When he left Washington, bilateral relations between Sri Lanka and the US were at a high point, Samarasinghe noted. Describing the US as a true friend of Sri Lanka, he cited the four Coast Guard cutters and 10 helicopters provided to the country, support through the US International Development Finance Corporation (DFC) and assistance following the tsunami.

“All this has been 100 percent grants and not loans that Sri Lanka has to pay back,” he said.

He also credited the US with helping Sri Lanka secure its IMF programme, supporting the country during debt restructuring discussions with the Paris Club and assisting in the ongoing Hamilton Reserve Bank case. The US-based bondholder sued Sri Lanka in a New York court in 2022 over its holdings of defaulted International Sovereign Bonds.

“When it came to the IMF negotiations, I was there in the thick of it, and without US help, Sri Lanka would never have got the IMF deal. The US is a true friend of Sri Lanka, and if we have them on board, their cooperation makes it that much easier for us,” he stated.

Samarasinghe expressed hope that his successor would not only maintain the relationship but consolidate it further.