President Premadasa takes over Education Ministry and signals total trust in me & Ministry

After Minister Athulathmudali’s departure, matters went on in a state of crisis during the whole of September and into mid-October. The Ministry, the Departments and the Agencies went on with their work. There was no slackening. For about one and a half months now, the Ministry was without a Minister. Sometime around October 15 the President telephoned me in office. The crisis was now resolved. The President had prorogued Parliament and turned the tables on his political opponents.

This prevented the impeachment from being presented to Parliament and gained time for him to deal with waverers and malcontents among his MPs. The dissidents were expelled from the Party. “Kehelwatta has triumphed over Kurunduwatte,” said the political commentators and critics. This was a reference to the humble and plebian origins of Mr. Premadasa in the poor area called “Kehelwatte” or banana grove as opposed to the more aristocratic origins, background or associations of his main protagonists of high class, “Kurunduwatte” or Cinnamon Gardens, an area synonymous with privilege, wealth and luxury.

“Cinnamon Gardens” or “Kurunduwatte” was therefore symbolic of the status and values that were the antithesis of a humble “Kehelwatte.” The person from these humble beginnings, who did not possess any University degrees except as he frequently said, a degree from “The University of Life,” had triumphed over pundits who had acquired an array of law degrees from Sri Lanka, Oxford and Harvard. The President was visibly more relaxed now and free to once again concentrate on the affairs of state.

“Dharmasiri, you are without a Minister now. I thought of becoming your Minister for a short time. But I don’t want to do so for long,” the President said over the telephone. I welcomed the idea, and said that the Ministry had been too long without a Minister. “When shall I come to Isurupaya?” he then inquired. We discussed this, and 5 p.m. on October 21, 1991 was decided. Knowing the President’s observances and practices I had the presence of mind to ask him whether he wanted monks to chant Seth Pirith when lie came. He said “Yes. Very good.” I then asked him whether about five monks would do. He said “Yes.”

As I was about to ring off I suddenly remembered that it was best to check from what temple the monks should be invited. I was generally unaware of the politics of temples. To my question, the President answered that it would be best to invite monks from the nearby Kotte Rajamaha Vihare. In the course of this conversation, the President instructed me to see that all the Ministers in the system were present, which included Mr. Hameed. He also wanted the heads and all the senior level officers of the Ministry, departments and other agencies present as well as his own Secretary Mr. Wijayadasa and Mr. Piyadigama, his Additional Secretary overlooking Education from the Presidential Secretariat. Finally, he requested the presence of Ven. Galeboda Gnanissara (Podi Hamuduruwo) of the Gangaramaya Temple and Mr. W.J.M. Loku Bandara a former Minister of Education.

This was quite a gathering. The President who was now the new Minister of Education and Higher Education, arrived sharp on time, was greeted by the Ministers and myself and conducted to the Minister’s room. After the religious observances the meeting commenced. Just before the meeting I informed the new Minister, that I had 11 Cabinet Papers and two Supplementary Estimates going to Parliament to be signed by him. These had piled up in the absence of a Minister, and I wanted some time from him after the meeting.

This was particularly important for me since I was due to depart the following night for Paris to attend the General Conference of UNESCO. The President agreed. The meeting which commenced at around 5.30 p.m. went on till around 7.45 p.m. The President wished to familiarize himself with the work and responsibilities of his new portfolio. During the course of the discussions, he stated that he did not intend to come often to the Ministry. He wanted the Ministers in the system and the Secretary to carry on, and embarrassed me by saying that the Ministry performed better without a Minister. This was of course very much a shot at Mr. Athulathmudali, although it was a fact that the officials did run the Ministry efficiently and without problems.

But this couldn’t have gone on for a long time, without the neglect of important policy issues. The President concluded by saying that once a month he would hold a “Mini Cabinet” meeting of all relevant persons. I had instructed my diligent and efficient personal Assistant Mr. Richard Silva to have the Cabinet Papers and the Supplementary Estimates ready to be brought in, the moment the meeting terminated. When this occurred, the President himself remembered and saying “Come” he moved over to the sitting room area of the room, sat down and patted a seat near him for me to sit.

The 13 files were brought in which were quite a bundle and arranged on a large chair in two heaps. The President had pulled out his pen and I picked the file containing the first Cabinet paper and started explaining what it was about. The President interrupted interrupted me and said “Not necessary. You have gone through it,” and inquired, “Where do I sign?” I was quite stunned. He signed it. I picked up the next file and tried to explain. He wouldn’t hear of it. “Not necessary,” he said, and wanted only to know “Where do I sign?”

In this manner he blindly signed 11 Cabinet papers and the two Supplementary Estimates going up to a Parliament that very nearly impeached him. “Is that all?” he asked pleasantly at the end of the signing, and then said, “Good night. I will get along then.” I was completely bewildered. I had never directly worked with Mr. Premadasa in any of his Ministries, or in any capacity. I had been a member of the Rasaputram Committee on Poverty Alleviation, but that was on the basis of a Cabinet decision.

I had had no direct contact with him in my entire career in the public service up to this time, except for one or two telephone calls and one or two accidental meetings.

Apart from all this, I was the one who spoke in public, complimentarily of Mr. Athulathmudali at a time when the President loathed him and which speech was carried prominently in the newspapers. Everyone also knew that the President was an avid reader of newspapers, which he did first thing in the morning. The net result of all these seemed to be that he was not even prepared to look at some of the most important papers a Secretary could put up to a Minister, and was ready to sign blindly.

I was first quite stunned, then touched at this strong and visible acknowledgment of my integrity, and also frightened. What if there was a mistake in any of those papers, particularly the ones going up to Parliament? And I was due to leave the country the next day. I quickly got hold of our Senior Additional Secretary Mrs. Kamala Wickremasinghe; Mr. Wimalagunawardena, another Additional Secretary and Mr. Stanley Wijesinghe my Senior Assistant Secretary and asked them to proceed to my room immediately.

The time now was past 8.30 p.m. and they were about to go home. I then described what happened. All of them were quite stunned too. They thought it was a powerful signal of confidence in me. I corrected them and said “the Ministry too,” and reminded them of how we all collectively functioned in the national interest during a most difficult period, not only politically but also emotionally for all of us liked Mr. Athulathmudali very much. I then told them, that as they were aware I was leaving the country the next day. I wanted the three of them to promise me that they would get together and re-check every word and figure in the Cabinet papers, and more particularly the documents going to Parliament, where I emphasized the need to check among other things whether the words tallied with the figures.

In the aftermath of all that had happened we could not take any risk of the President being embarrassed in parliament on a document he had signed on complete trust. I told my three colleagues that unless they personally promised to do as I had wanted, I was going to stay back and do it myself. They solemnly promised and said they would take complete responsibility. I could trust them to be responsible and diligent and I left with a lighter heart.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.