Vidullanka enters grid-scale energy storage with first of 13 BESS facilities

Vidullanka PLC, in partnership with WindForce PLC, will inaugurate its first of 13 standalone Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) facilities today in Anuradhapura, in a ceremony marking a landmark achievement for the company and Sri Lanka’s renewable energy industry. The occasion will be graced by the presence of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and Energy Minister Anura Karunathilaka.

The 10MW/40MWh facility was developed under the project company StoreX Ltd., which will develop 11 more BESS projects across the island as part of Sri Lanka’s first- grid-scale standalone BESS initiative. Vidullanka and WindForce have also partnered to develop a 13th project in Vavunathivu, under the project company Solar Universe Ltd. Together, these 13 projects will have a combined capacity of 130MW/520MWh, extending Vidullanka’s footprint into grid-scale energy storage and positioning the company as a key player in shaping the next phase of Sri Lanka’s energy transition.

The inaugurated facility marks Vidullanka’s expansion beyond electricity generation, adding energy storage as a new dimension to its diversified portfolio. The company is also set to commission its eighth ground-mounted solar facility in Hambantota, bringing its total capacity to 96 MW and its portfolio to 27 projects.

Vidullanka PLC is a leading renewable energy company with a diversified portfolio built over the course of nearly three decades since its incorporation in 1997. The company operates its own hydro, solar and dendro assets in Sri Lanka and Uganda, and offers services in several key areas including operations and maintenance (O&M), engineering, procurement and construction (EPC), and more. Alongside its entry into grid-scale energy storage, the company has also ventured into e-mobility with its EV charging brand, VEDRIVE. Driven by its vision to sustainably energise the planet, the company is committed to advancing clean energy solutions that drive effective sustainable development.

For the 2025/26 financial year, Vidullanka reported a revenue of Rs.3.8 billion and a profit after tax (PAT) of Rs. 1.55 billion. For the first quarter of 2026/27, the company recorded a revenue of Rs. 1.1 billion and a PAT of Rs. 555 million. Furthermore, the Group’s Annual General Meeting is expected to take place on Thursday, the 24 September 2026.