Siyapatha Finance expands islandwide footprint to Nikaweratiya

Homegrown finance company Siyapatha Finance PLC recently opened its 61st branch in Nikaweratiya, successfully progressing a step further with the Company’s broader expansion efforts of bringing holistic financial solutions to all communities across Sri Lanka.

The newest branch was declared open by Siyapatha Finance PLC Managing Director Ananda Seneviratne, in the presence of Chief Executive Officer (Designate) Mathisha Hewawitharana, and senior management, as well as Police OIC Harison Somasiri, Grama Niladhari H.M.T. Namal Bandara representatives of the government and private banks and insurance companies, and well-wishers.

Endowed with fertile soil and flat lands ideal for cultivation, Nikeweratiya has gained fame for its agricultural heritage and prominence, where the community continues to place emphasis on the integration of unique farming techniques to this day.

While traditionally and historically renowned for agriculture, Nikaweratiya has diversified its economic base into non-traditional industries. Presently, the employment landscape is dominated by the service sector, agriculture and industrial sectors.

Over the span of a few decades, Nikaweratiya saw a remarkable shift in the real estate industry. The region’s positioning – supported by advancing infrastructure and improved climate for investments – has paved the way to a rise in modern housing projects as well as the availability of commercial spaces.

“The highest form of gratification for Siyapatha Finance is witnessing the impact our services have towards the lives of the people we reach out to,” commented Siyapatha Finance PLC Managing Director Ananda Seneviratne. “During our timeline for the Nikaweratiya branch, we observed that the local community has opened up for new avenues. For instance, we have observed the youth emerging in digital services, women engaged in handloom crafts, and the overall agriculture industry gradually adopting organic farming practices. In such a background, we believe our support is essential to help this community build the foundation for success.”

Boasting a comprehensive product portfolio ranging from leasing, fixed deposits, gold financing, business loans, personal loans, fast draft, and factoring to “Smart Pay” – its bill payment facility, the newest branch aims to help entrepreneurs, small and medium-scale enterprises (SMEs), and aspiring young individuals to seize growth opportunities and encourage smart financial decision-making in the long run.

Following the recent floods in the country and the number of lives affected , a low key opening ceremony was conducted and the money had been allocated for donating gift vouchers for the school children to buy school shoes and socks.

Port City Colombo reaches 11 years: Developer reaffirms commitment to further project progress

Bank of Ceylon contributes Rs. 500 million to government’s “Rebuilding Sri Lanka” fund

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.