EU opens door for Canada to become its first associate member, von der Leyen says

Reuters - European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said the European Union ​is opening the door for Canada to become its first "associate member", a ‌status that is not set out in the bloc's treaties.

Von der Leyen's announcement is a significant shift in EU policy. The bloc has historically resisted flexible categories and EU members were lukewarm ​in reacting to Germany's proposal in May of associate membership for Ukraine as a ​stepping stone to full accession.

"Partnerships are a strategic choice for Europe. ⁠But they also respond to the fracture in the international rules-based system," von der ​Leyen said in her annual State of the European Union address to the European ​Parliament in Strasbourg.

"We see the world with the same eyes: from AI to climate change, from the Arctic to geopolitics. And we have stood together: on Ukraine, on defence, on raw materials and ​on supply chains. But above all...Europe and Canada believe in democracy."

Canada's Prime Minister ​Mark Carney said earlier this week Canada was seeking a "unique alliance" with the EU but not membership. ‌Von ⁠der Leyen invited Carney to join her in Strasbourg and he will make his own address on Thursday.

Carney's European trip follows a historic breakdown in Canada-U.S. relations after trade talks collapsed last month, sparking a series of tit-for-tat tariff measures.

"I said we ​must urgently reimagine our ​partnerships. So, I ⁠would like to work with you on opening the door for Canada to be the first associate member of the EU," von ​der Leyen said.

She added the EU and Canada will work ​together on ⁠across sectors from manufacturing to AI, critical minerals and energy.

"We will work on intelligent manufacturing. We will create a tech alliance. We will integrate defence industrial bases. We will make ⁠the ​Arctic a flagship joint project," she said.

Von der Leyen ​added "this is a partnership not against anyone else" in a possible effort to avoid antagonizing U.S. President ​Donald Trump.