West Indies legend Sobers dies aged 89

(BBC) - Legendary former West Indies all-rounder Sir Garfield Sobers, regarded as one of the greatest cricketers of all time, has died aged 89.

Sobers played 93 Tests between 1954 and 1974, scored 8,032 runs and took 235 wickets.

An entertaining left-handed batter, Sobers scored 365 not out against Pakistan in 1958 - an effort which stood as the record Test score for 36 years.

He was also a brilliantly versatile bowler, who bowled spin and seam.

Sobers, who also played county cricket for Nottinghamshire, was knighted for his services to cricket in 1975.

He was also named one of Wisden's five cricketers of the 20th century.

During his stint at Nottinghamshire in 1968, Sobers became the first player to hit a six off all six balls in an over in a first-class match.

A period of celebration will be held in memory of Sobers before Nottinghamshire's T20 Blast semi-final against Hampshire at Edgbaston on Saturday.

The club described Sobers as "cricket's greatest-ever all-rounder and an iconic figure in Nottinghamshire history".

"We are extremely saddened to hear of the passing of Sir Garfield Sobers," Notts added.

England also paid tribute on social media, calling Sobers "one of the greatest to ever play the game".

Sobers was also one of only two living National Heroes of Barbados alongside pop singer Rihanna.

He made his first-class debut for Barbados aged 16 and was capped by West Indies aged 17.

He was initially more successful as a bowler than batter - he bowled left-arm finger-spin and occasional wrist-spin as well as pace - but went on to score 26 Test centuries and finished his career with a batting average of 57.78.

He scored 28,314 in his first-class career, including 7,041 for Nottinghamshire. He took 1,043 first-class wickets and was also a superb fielder.

Though not as successful a skipper as player, he was West Indies captain between 1965 and 1972. He also captained Rest of the World XIs during tours of England and Australia.

"Not just because of the phenomenal numbers but the style, quality, substance and flair and circumstances in which he produced those performances, he is without doubt the greatest cricketer that ever lived," said Test Match Special commentator Fazeer Mohammed.

"He was the first superstar of the game, not just in the Caribbean but in the world. His career spanned the period where the game was just starting the change.

"The mere presence of a Garfield Sobers made such a huge difference to the image of what West Indies cricket was able to do."

The president of the International Cricket Council (ICC), Jay Shah, said cricket had lost one of its "greatest icons" and the "finest all-rounder the game has ever known".

"His remarkable ability to influence a match in every facet of the game set him apart from his peers," Shah said.

"Whether with the bat, ball or in the field, Sir Garfield embodied excellence, and his achievements continue to define the standard to which generations of cricketers aspire.

"Sir Garfield was a true ambassador for our sport. His legacy extends far beyond records and statistics. He helped shape the identity of West Indies cricket during one of its most celebrated eras and leaves behind an indelible mark on the history of our game."

Cricket West Indies president Kishore Shallow paid tribute, calling Sobers a "symbol of Caribbean excellence, resilience, and possibility".

"In the story of cricket, there are great players. There are champions. Then, there are those rare individuals who redefine the very meaning of greatness," he said.

"Sir Garfield Sobers was the greatest cricketer the world has ever seen. His mastery of batting, bowling and fielding was unparalleled, but his true significance reached far beyond the boundary ropes.

"He emerged from the Caribbean at a time when our region was finding its voice and asserting its place on the world stage.

"Through his excellence, he gave millions across our islands and in the diaspora, a renewed belief in what was possible. He showed that greatness was not confined by the size of our nations, the geography of our islands or the circumstances of our beginnings.

"Sir Garfield Sobers became more than a sporting icon. He became a symbol of Caribbean excellence, resilience, and possibility.

"His achievements brought pride to Barbados, inspiration to the West Indies and admiration from every corner of the cricketing world."

Barbados Prime Minister Mia Mottley said that Friday would be a day of national mourning on the island, as would the day of Sobers' funeral, while extending her sympathies to his family and loved ones.