Investing in ‘Healthy Schools’:the Chinese way

Education is the process of teaching or learning, especially in a school or college, or the knowledge that you get from this (Ref. Cambridge). The general objective would be the overall benefit of the human civilization. Sri Lankans first learned the word school from the Portuguese who called it an ‘Escola’. Most Sri Lankans have beautiful memories of their school days.

A non Muslim may remember leaving school early on Fridays pretending to be a Muslim (in the early 1980s Education officials took a policy decision to allow Muslim students to leave early on Fridays to attend prayers). Another would cherish sporting, scouting or outdoor activity memories. China in an effort to develop healthy schools recently issued new guidelines on allowing children to spend more time outdoors. As per the new policies, children are expected to spend more time on artistic hobbies & handicrafts etc. This is seen as the first step in implementing the ‘health first’ education philosophy with the objective of promoting all round physical & psychological development. Efforts will be made to enhance aesthetic education by fully offering arts courses & improving regular art exhibition & performance mechanisms accessible to all students. Labor education will be reinforced through programs aimed at cultivating sound work habits & helping students’ labor skills & achievements. Mental health education will be deepened by strengthening professional teams & advancing the development of a nationwide monitoring & early warning system. Proposed Chinese measures to prevent/ control myopia especially during early childhood stages are notable (Ref. Chinese education ministry).

‘Myopia’ is a condition where one cannot clearly see things that are far away (Ref. Cambridge). Judging China’s path (especially since 1949), far sightedness can be identified as one of their key strengths. However, many may have a different view of the far seeing ability of Sri Lankans. Chinese officials are expecting the ‘health first’ philosophy to be widely embraced & extended to all schools by 2030. Though Sri Lankans on many occasions have discussed education reforms, a return on investment analysis since 1948 may indicate that Sri Lankans have more space to learn especially on the implementing processes. Though some try to portray India as a force against China, China has supported to provide vocational training to nearly 1000 Indian youth through the ‘Lu Ban’ workshops donated since 2017. Since 2016 China has donated ‘Lu Ban’ workshops to Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) partners in Asia, Africa & Europe helping to train more than 10,000 youth & 1000 teachers.

Lu Ban (507–440 BC) is revered as the patron god of builders, craftsmen, & contractors in the Chinese civilization. The legendary carpenter, engineer, & inventor (AKA ‘father of carpentry’) is believed to be the inventor of the saw, chisel, plane & the ‘Lu Ban’ stool (the folding stool made without nails). These inventions which significantly advanced ancient wood construction are now mechanized with the development of technology. With the 15th five year plan (2026 – 2030) China is expected to invest more on vocational education expecting its workforce to be specialized & technologically proficient. China & India are good global case studies but Sri Lankans may also study the efforts of Anagarika Dharmapala (son of the legendary carpenter Don Carolis Hewavitharana) & Rev. Brother Hermenegild Joeseph founder of the Diyagala Boys Town, Ragama to promote vocational education.

NDB Bank partners with Cinnamon Lakeside Colombo as Exclusive Banking Partner

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.