DIMO joins forces with young racing star Yevan David

With a shared mission to enhance Sri Lanka’s position on the global stage, leading diversified conglomerate DIMO and young racing prodigy Yevan David have forged a partnership that redefines the country’s path to the international motorsport arena.

Yevan’s exposure to motor racing started at the tender age of six, when he went karting with his father at Sri Lanka’s premier facility, the Sri Lanka Karting Circuit (now SpeedBay) in Bandaragama. Showing great promise, his family recognized that this could be Yevan’s true calling, and by 2015, he was competing in kart racing in Singapore. Showcasing his talent and masterful driving technique, he was soon racing in Malaysia and Macau as well. By 2017, ten-year-old Yevan became the IAME Asia Series X30 Champion in the Cadet category. The following year, he secured the X30 Asia Cup in the Cadet Category, winning the race at the very place he first stepped into a kart – SpeedBay, Bandaragama. From there, he continued in professional kart racing before entering the worlds of Eurocup3, Formula 4, and Euroformula Open in 2024. In 2025, he stormed to a sensational rookie season in the Euroformula Open Championship, clinching the Rookie trophy as well as securing the overall second place in the Championship. He will become the first Sri Lankan to compete in FIA Formula 3.

Commenting on this partnership, Rajeev Pandithage, Executive Director of DIMO, said, “DIMO has always been at the forefront of automotive trends and innovations in Sri Lanka, and we pride ourselves on supporting local young talent to reach the global arena. Yevan’s effervescent energy, inimitable talent, and racing spirit are all qualities that bring us immense pride as a nation. We believe this partnership enables us to enhance Sri Lanka’s position on the global stage.”

Rakuten Symphony and SLT-MOBITEL partner for open RAN trial in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.