New role for singer Alston Koch

Singer Alston Koch, of ‘Disco Lady’ fame, is in the news again, in a big way, but not as a performer!

Reports coming my way indicate that Alston has been appointed Envoy for the Commonwealth Union to Australia and the Pacific Region, and that the appointment came into effect on 03rd October, 2025.

Alston, they say, will represent the Commonwealth Union and promote its objectives in line with the People’s Charter of the Commonwealth, focusing on strengthening regional collaboration, advancing the Commonwealth Union’s mission of inclusivity and sustainability, and fostering greater engagement with communities across Australia and the Pacific.

Alongside his Envoy responsibilities, the singer, I’m told, will also serve as a Consultant to the Commonwealth Union, providing advisory services and acting as a marketing consultant to enhance the Union’s outreach and global presence.

Alston Koch, as we are all aware, is an internationally recognised artiste, award-winning entertainer, and global influencer with a decades-long international career, having performed worldwide and achieved success in several countries, including Australia, Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, India, and Sri Lanka.

He has received numerous awards, as well, including being named ‘Sri Lankan of the Year’, in 2018, and ‘World Artiste of the Year’ at the Global Officials of Dignity Awards. He’s also an Ambassador for Sri Lanka Tourism, Family Film Awards (USA), and The Arts for Peace Foundation (USA).

What’s more, Alston has championed awareness on environmental challenges and sustainable solutions as an Ambassador for Climate Change (I.C.T.P.) and has received certificates of recognition from the California State Senate and the United States Congress for improving the lives of communities in America.

The singer, who is in Colombo, at the moment, relaxing, indicated to The Island that he was thrilled, and excited, to receive such a prestigious appointment, and went on to say that he is eagerly looking forward to making his present felt in a big way.

Alston Koch is a Sri Lanka born Australian; Singer-songwriter, film producer, record producer and actor.

After gaining international success in the late 1970s, he was often described, in the Australian and Asian media, as “Asia’s King of Pop” or “Pop King of Asia.”

He was the Lead Actor in the movie ‘According to Matthew,’ along with Jacqueline Fernandez.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.