Is the Compass heading in the right direction?

Governments are elected in Sri Lanka with massive majorities, and huge expectations, due to protest votes against failed administrations. One may argue that the massive mandate received by the NPP in the parliamentary elections held on 14 November last year, when it won an unprecedented 159 seats, was in a way different, at least partly; voters were enticed by the promise of a ‘system change’. Whatever the interpretation, the more important question is whether the NPP government has met the people’s expectations. Though some caution is needed in making an early judgement, a year is long enough to figure out whether it is heading in the right direction.

Unfortunately, it was not an auspicious start. The very first act of the government turned out to be just the opposite of what it claimed to stand for. The first Speaker of the NPP government had to step down when the doctorate he claimed to have obtained from a private university in Japan was questioned. He did so reluctantly, temporarily according to him, because he has misplaced the certificates and promised to be back in the saddle once the certificates were found. Of course, he could not counter the criticism that he was a hypocrite in that he led a protest campaign against the private medical school set up by SAITM whilst claiming that he had obtained a PhD from a private university in Japan. One year has passed and he continues to be an MP. Why does the NPP, which came to power, branding previous parliamentarians as liars and cheats, continue to accommodate him in Parliament? Perhaps, they have started hounding Namal about his qualifications as a diversion!

Have the standards in Parliament improved since the last general election? Regrettably, the answer is in the negative. It is not only the Opposition MPs who misbehave but also Ministers, using offensive language and misusing parliamentary privilege to throw mud at opponents. Some of their claims have backfired spectacularly; the best example being allegations about political connections to the drug mafia. When a suspicious consignment was found in Middeniya, Rajapaksas were blamed, as usual! It was done because the land belonged to a former SLPP local councillor.

Interestingly, the Government Analyst has found that the substances found are not material for the manufacture of ICE, contrary to claims made by the government. In a twist of irony, an NPP local councillor, who sat close to AKD at a much-hyped anti-drug meeting, had to resign when it was found that her son and husband were involved in the drug trade!

Ministers assured they would take full responsibility for the release of 323 containers without inspection, but the report is yet to be tabled. Meanwhile, the Customs officer, who defended the actions of the government, has been rewarded by being appointed the Head of the organisation! There seems to be an increase of underworld killings, following the release of these containers: is it a mere coincidence?

Parliament has been reduced to an appendage of the NPP. The Speaker and his Deputy seem to be completely oblivious to the fact that they are duty-bound to act impartially.

The Opposition wanted to move a vote of no-confidence against the Deputy Minister of Defence, not because they were confident of victory but because they wanted to expose his conflict of interest. The Speaker ruled that there was no provision for moving a vote of no-confidence against a Deputy Minister, despite the Attorney General, as well as the Parliamentary Secretariat, opining that there was no such barrier.

MOUs signed with India, and other countries, are yet to be tabled in the parliament. If any other government had done such things, had the JVP been in the Opposition, there would have been riots in the streets. Hard to believe that these are the actions of a party that came to power promising honesty and openness! In fact, they seem to be worse.

Though the Easter Sunday attack was investigated by many external agencies, as well, including the FBI and terrorism experts, like Rohan Gunaratna, opining that this was the work of Islamic extremists, a non-existent mastermind, is being sought.

AKD promised a great reveal but failed miserably and now he says vital documents have been destroyed! Leading the new investigation are two political appointees blamed for failures to prevent it and the absurdity of President AKD’s explanations is exposed by The Island in its editorial, “Thus spake the Prez” (The Island, 20 November) which starts with following interesting paragraph:

“President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has strongly defended two political appointees occupying the top positions in the Ministry of Public Security and the Criminal Investigation Department (CID). The modus operandi adopted by him to support his brief for them is a textbook example of ‘straw man’, a logical fallacy, which involves recasting opponents’ arguments into weaker versions that are easier to refute instead of addressing stronger, substantive issues.”

The NPP, during the election campaign, promised to get rid of perks for politicians and gave the impression they would be using public transport but has now decided to import double cabs. I cannot better what Prof C A Saliya stated in his piece “Double Cab debacle – Soviet-style standardisation” (The Island, 19 November):

“The NPP government’s decision to procure 1,775 brand-new double cab pickup trucks … represents not merely a questionable procurement decision, but a dangerous convergence of fiscal irresponsibility, procedural irregularities, and a disturbing drift toward authoritarian governance.

What the government presents as a solution to transport inefficiencies is, upon closer examination, a regressive policy that abandons proven private sector practices, multiplies taxpayer burdens, and signals an ominous shift in the political culture of our already fragile democracy.”

I can go on, but is there any further need to point out that the ‘Compass’ is not heading in the right direction? What surprises me is how quickly Malimawa let down the voters!

How Lee Kuan Yew turned a small island into a global powerhouse

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.