Of Whales and Submarines: Sri Lanka’s Security Dilemma

In November 2020, a mass whale stranding occurred just north of the Kalutara District in Panadura, involving over 120 short-finned pilot whales. Officials from the Navy and Coast Guard, marine mammal experts, environmentalists and passers-by , all distressed at this sight, fought night and day to get the whales back out to sea. Why did this large scale stranding happen, a repetition of a smaller event earlier on the East coast? Could it have anything to do with the disorientation of the marine mammals by the Malabar maritime war games, ships and submarines, which had taken place in Indian Ocean waters around the same time, the first time all four Quad nations—India, the United States, Japan, and Australia—participated together.

Sri Lankans may not have drawn the links between maritime naval exercises and the emission of submarine sonars which could disorient and cause fatalities among the marine mammals which have their breeding grounds around our island since ancient times. However in US courts, these links have been authenticated by scientists and legislated into protection for marine mammals. In the US, courts have historically restricted U.S. Navy sonar usage through preliminary injunctions and rulings under the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) mandating “mitigation zones,” power-downs, and geographic restrictions in ecologically sensitive areas like marine sanctuaries” (Horowitz, 2015).

Isn’t it time for Sri Lanka to declare Marine Mammal Protection areas around Mirissa and Trincomalee? Unless we ourselves take steps to protect our marine mammals, how can we raise concerns on maritime environmental protection and safety at Indian Ocean Rim gatherings? The looming threat of submarine warfare has became a reality with the US torpedo attack on the Iranian vessel IRIS Dena close to Sri Lanka’s Economic Zone in March this year where Sri Lanka bore the costs of the humanitarian rescue.

Western political analysts used to harp on the “debt trap” cast by China through its large infrastructure projects in its Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), coining a mythical “string of pearls” in the Indian Ocean where Sri Lanka’s Hambantota figured prominently. One hears less of that rhetoric today as US President Donald Trump and his Department of War are being castigated around the world for igniting a global energy crisis as a result of its war on Iran. The entire Gulf region is in turmoil trying to balance their prosperous worlds, built under the American security umbrella now endangered by Iran, a desperate neighbor fighting for its survival.

In May this year, the US-China summit in Beijing seemed to provide a “détente” following their leaders joint agreement to build “a constructive China-US relationship of strategic stability”. How will this new found understanding effect the future of AUKUS, a strategic partnership between US,UK and Australia, signed in 2001 which saw China as its main enemy? A major pillar under AUKUS has been the order by Australia of some eight new nuclear powered attack submarines, estimated to cost over $368 bn, involving the unprecedented transfer of nuclear technology from a nuclear state (US) to a non-nuclear state (Australia).

This has raised protests from UN member states pressing for disarmament and non proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. An ill-fated project, plagued with changes of foreign contracts and shipyard delays, the delivery of the new attack submarines has been postponed to beyond 2050 costing Australia an additional $11 billion to upgrade its present submarine fleet while operating under the US umbrella. In May 2026 a second pillar of AUKUS was announced, to build underwater drones using AI technology . Is it possible that these new weapons will be tested and operated in the Indian Ocean, creating a whole range of new threats to our marine mammals?

Even as Sri Lanka believes they are safe within our proclaimed policies of non-alignment and neutrality, foreign plans involving Sri Lanka’s ports are progressing apace. In the Colombo port, major Indian investments through private partnership (Adani) and Indian government defense contractor (Mazagon) have been quickly supported by funding from the IFC, the World Bank window for private sector finance. High level US officials were seen to visit Colombo port. Are these moves intended to compete with the Hambantota port and Colombo Port City developments which are led by Chinese investors?

In parallel, the US Navy is developing its relations with the Sri Lanka navy, a quiet cooperation that has been advancing over the years, through joint training and gifts of excess equipment. Our navy officers, tired of guarding the coasts from marauding Indian trawlers and endless drug seizures from multiday fishing vessels, are happy to join in the exercises with the Big Powers and go out on the high seas.

According to internet sources, the United States has donated a total of four ships to the Sri Lanka Navy, all of which are former U.S. Coast Guard cutters provided under the Excess Defense Articles program, being:

SLNS Gajabahu : Formerly the USCGC Sherman, this 115-meter Hamilton-class cutter was handed over in 2018

SLNS Vijayabahu: Formerly the USCGC Douglas Munro, this second 115-meter cutter was delivered to the Sri Lankan fleet in late 2022.

SLNS Decisive: Formally transferred to the Sri Lanka Navy in December 2025 and arriving in early 2026, this is a 64-meter Reliance-class cutter.

The US has also donated a fleet of 10 helicopters to the Sri Lanka Air force, TH-57 Sea Ranger (a military variant of the Bell 206B-3 Jet Ranger) under the same program. Since 2025 US security partner Japan has provided the Sri Lanka Navy with approximately 10 advanced surveillance drones and related equipment valued at approximately Rs. one billion, being the first time Tokyo has provided defense equipment to Sri Lanka under its Official Security Assistance (OSA).

Why is this bilateral security cooperation significant? Is it linked to Trincomalee’s renown deriving from its geography, the magnificent deep water bay of strategic importance documented by the European powers who occupied the port in colonial times and used it for shipping and military purposes? Accounts of today mention it to be the fifth deepest harbour globally and the first in Asia capable of anchoring cape sized ships.

They refer to its naturally sheltered harbour, one of the finest in the Indian Ocean, capable of accommodating large vessels year round without extensive dredging. The Eastern Naval Command of Sri Lanka and Sri Lanka Air Force at China Bay are already located within the harbour. However, they may need to strengthen the capability to monitor the movements of submarines and new underwater drones around our waters and inside our harbours.

Leading the foreign pack, a neighbouring power once placed a strategic block on Sri Lanka’s use of its ports. The secret Annexure to the Indo- Sri Lanka Agreement of 1987 was released to public knowledge after signature by then Sri Lanka President J R Jayewardene. It includes this clause, inter alia:

“Trincomalee or any other ports in Sri Lanka will not be made available for military use by any country in a manner prejudicial to India’s interests.”

With growing nationalism in the island, many will ask how such a strategic block could be enforced in an independent sovereign nation, and whether the Annexure is in fact a “dead letter”.

The 1987 Annexure also reveals an interesting turn around or re-alignment in security cooperation among the big powers, considering that in the 1980’s India objected to the Sri Lanka government proposal to lease the oil tank farm to an American firm. The said Annexure thus stated that :

” The work of restoring and operating the Trincomalee Oil Tank farm will be undertaken as a joint venture between India and Sri Lanka” .

But now 40 years later India is working together with the US and its allies such as UAE to create an oil hub in Trincomalee as part of its regional security initiatives! While no one objects to the restoring of the oil tank farm, environmentalists worry about linking such restoration to building an oil pipeline from Trincomalee to India. Such a pipeline runs the risk of deliberate sabotage or accidental damage in which case who will pay for the costs in such an environmental disaster polluting our waters for decades to come?

And what of the role of Israel, US strategic partner? Questions have been raised over the many Israelis coming to live or for rest and recreation in the Arugam Bay area on the East coast, a community large enough to necessitate the setting up of a religious/cultural institution such as Chabod House. Bilateral relations with Israel are increasing today with new employment opportunities being offered to Sri Lankans. Yet intelligence is a murky business and military training apparently was once offered by Israel to both Sri Lankan soldiers and LTTE combatants provoking a huge controversy in this country in the 1990’s following the revelations of Victor Ostrovsky, retired Mossad agent (Way Of Deception: The Making And Unmaking Of A Mossad Officer).

The above historical recall is the background for my central argument that regional security is in a state of flux and that Sri Lanka must remain vigilant to identify and protect its national interests especially the precious biodiversity which has attracted visitors to this country since ancient times. At this time, 20 years after the end of the armed conflict, Sri Lanka is undertaking a re-sizing of its armed forces and former military and intelligence chiefs are under sanction within the country and abroad. A new generation of leaders has taken over political and security power. Sri Lanka’s vulnerability is further exposed by natural disasters intensified by climate change, cyclonic storms, landslides and flooding while some predict a severe El Nino drought will follow. Time has come to stimulate a public debate on Sri Lanka’s dilemma of identifying and balancing our national security concerns against the interests of external actors, keeping in mind our role as guardians of the biodiversity treasure that we must protect for the generations to come.

(Sarala Fernando retired from the Foreign Ministry as Additional Secretary, her last Ambassadorial appointment was as Permanent Representative to the UN and International Organizations in Geneva. Her Ph.D was on India-Sri Lanka relations and she writes now on foreign policy, public diplomacy and protection of heritage).

The anatomy of the bond scam and the Ranil – Sirisena fallout

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.