We learnt of US concerns from the Daily Mirror only’ — Iranian Embassy

Colombo, Sep. 10 (Daily Mirror) - Amid reports about the presence of Iranian vessels in international waters outside Sri Lanka and the U.S. Embassy raising concerns about it, the Iranian Embassy yesterday said that it had learnt of such concerns only from the Sri Lankan media.

Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath, in response to a question at the weekly Cabinet meeting on Tuesday, said that there were 47 vessels, including a small number of Iranian vessels, lingering outside Sri Lanka’s territorial waters. He said the US embassy in Colombo had raised concerns with the Foreign Ministry about the presence of several Iranian vessels in international waters and had inquired whether Sri Lanka authorities were aware of them and monitoring their movements.

A U.S. Embassy spokesperson had told the Daily Mirror earlier that the substance of private diplomatic conversations would not be commented on.

Asked for a response from the Iranian Embassy in Colombo, a spokesman said that his office learned of the concerns raised from the Sri Lankan media only.

Sri Lanka can exercise its jurisdiction only over its territorial waters, which extend up to 12 nautical miles from the coastal baseline. It has economic rights over fisheries and non-living resources such as oil and minerals within its Exclusive Economic Zone, which extends up to 200 nautical miles.

According to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), every State has the right to establish the breadth of its territorial sea up to a limit not exceeding 12 nautical miles, measured from baselines determined in accordance with it.

Subject to this Convention, ships of all States, whether coastal or land-locked, enjoy the right of innocent passage through the territorial sea.

A total of 47 vessels have been identified in international waters more than 24 nautical miles from Sri Lanka’s territorial waters amid the ongoing military tensions between the United States and Iran.

Foreign Minister Herath said the vessels included several Iranian-flagged ships as well as other commercial and cargo vessels, none of which had entered Sri Lanka’s territorial waters.

The Minister said none of the vessels had requested facilities or assistance from the Sri Lankan Government, and no facilities had been provided to them.

Herath reiterated that, apart from monitoring the vessels, the Sri Lankan Government had not intervened or taken any action concerning them.