Unforgettable experience …

Singer Rajiv Sebastian has the unique ability to woo an audience and he did just that on his recent trip to London, performing at the Funky ’70s Bash Dinner Dance.

This particular event of music, nostalgia, and celebration, was organised by the Ananda Balika Vidyalaya Old Girls’ Association – UK, and held at the DoubleTree by Hilton London Elstree, in Borehamwood, on 28th February.

They say the success of the evening was made possible through the dedication and hard work of President Devika Arrawwalage and the committed committee members of the Ananda Balika Vidyalaya OGA – UK.

Rajiv Sebastian was in top form, delivering an engaging performance that took the audience on a nostalgic musical journey through the iconic sounds of the’70s.

Doing the first set in full suit, with a fan joining in the action

He did three sets, appearing in three different outfits – suit, the normal shirt and trouser, and the sarong – and the crowd loved it.

Adding to the energy of the event, I’m told, was the music provided by the band Hasthi, made up of Sri Lankan musicians based in the UK.

At the end of a truly enjoyable and memorable event, the organisers had this to say about Rajiv Sebastian’s performance:

“On behalf of the entire team, I want to extend our heartfelt thanks to you for travelling all the way from Sri Lanka to perform at our first ever ABV dinner dance in the UK.

“Your performance was truly the highlight of the night. You have a superb talent for captivating an audience; from the moment you took the stage, your vibrant energy and incredible vocal range completely transformed the atmosphere.

“It was wonderful to see how effortlessly you engaged the crowd, keeping the dance floor packed and everyone in high spirits throughout the evening. You have graced the stage as a guest artiste on three separate occasions, delivering exceptional performances that set you apart from your peers.

“We feel incredibly privileged to have had an artiste of your calibre and charisma join us. You didn’t just provide music; you created an unforgettable experience that people are still talking about.

“Thank you for sharing your immense gift with us. Hope to see you back on a UK stage very soon!”

Yes, and it’s happening soon; Rajiv says he is off to London again, in mid-April, and will be performing at four different venues.

He also mentioned that he has some surprises for his fans in Sri Lanka, when he and his band, The Clan, present their 35th Anniversary concert … in June, this year.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.