Sri Lanka pavilion gains prominent attention at Productronica 2025 in Germany

The Sri Lanka Export Development Board (EDB), in collaboration with the Sri Lanka Embassy in Berlin, Germany, has organised Sri Lanka’s participation at Productronica 2025 which was held from 18–21 November 2025 at the Messe München Trade Fair Center in the Messestadt Riem, Germany. The EDB has earlier organised a Sri Lanka Pavilion at Productronica in 2019 for the first time.

Productronica 2025 Messe München is a World’s leading Biennial Trade Fair with Innovative Solutions and products for the entire value chain in Electronics and Electrical Manufacturing. Productronica 2025 was a highly successful event, with over 1,600 exhibitors from 52 countries participated and demonstrated a robust and upbeat industry despite recent challenges. Key outcomes included a significant increase in exhibitors and international visitors, with over 47,000 attendees from nearly 100 countries. Productronica also celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2025.

Sri Lankan participating companies as exhibitors included Excel Tech Ltd., Dynexis Ltd., ICONIC Devices Ltd., Mega Heaters Ltd., Micro Electric International Ltd., and Micro Power Engineering Ltd., representing the Electronic and Electrical Manufacturing sector.

The Sri Lanka Pavilion’s distinctive and inventive product line and appeal drew a lot of interest from international buyers and visitors generating numerous business inquiries and new market opportunities. The 2025 participation further strengthened Sri Lanka’s Electronic and Electrical Manufacturing sector presence in the EU market and beyond, enhancing visibility for high-quality Sri Lankan products and reinforcing the island’s image as a reliable sourcing destination for premium goods.

The Minister Counsellor (Commercial) of the Sri Lankan Embassy in Berlin, Germany, welcomed and encouraged the Sri Lankan exhibitors at the pavilion.

The Sri Lankan exhibitors at Productronica 2025 has also showcased their products and services at SEMICON Europa, the largest European Electronics platform connecting Industry Leaders across the entire Manufacturing Supply Chain from every segment and sector of the European microelectronics industries including Semiconductors, LEDs, MEMS, Printed/Organic/Flexible, and other adjacent markets.

Moreover, the EDB is expecting to organise a Sri Lanka Pavilion at Electronica 2026 at the same venue to promote the Sri Lankan Electronic and Electrical Sector.