Sri Lanka says shares enduring values with Vatican

Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath (right) with Vatican Secretary for Relations with States and International Organisations Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher

Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath said Sri Lanka’s 50-year relationship with the Holy See stands as a partnership rooted in shared values of peace, reconciliation, and human dignity, reflecting five decades of mutual respect and cooperation.

Speaking after a meeting with Vatican Secretary for Relations with States and International Organisations Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher, Herath said the relationship has been shaped by humanitarian service, education, religious harmony, and nation-building efforts led by the Catholic Church in Sri Lanka.

Archbishop Gallagher said the Vatican looks forward to strengthening bilateral relations with Sri Lanka and cooperating to address shared global challenges. He said the Vatican remains committed to deepening engagement with Sri Lanka through continued cultural exchange initiatives, particularly as both states mark 50 years of diplomatic ties this year.

Foreign Minister said: “The Holy See has long been a moral voice on the global stage, advocating for justice, reconciliation, peace and disarmament, and the rights of all peoples, values that deeply resonate with the aspirations of the Sri Lankan people.

Over the past five decades, our relations have been underpinned by shared values, especially in the areas of humanitarian service, education, religious harmony, and the promotion of human dignity. The Catholic Church has played a vital role in Sri Lanka’s religious and social landscape, contributing significantly to nation-building and reconciliation, particularly in post-conflict contexts.

We also recall with deep gratitude the historic visits of His Holiness Pope Paul VI in 1970, His Holiness Pope John Paul II in 1995, and His Holiness Pope Francis in 2015, each of which left a lasting impression in the hearts of our people and strengthened the spiritual and diplomatic ties between our nations.

On a personal note, I recall with sorrow and reverence my recent visit to the Vatican to attend the funeral Mass of the late His Holiness Pope Francis on 26 April 2025. That solemn occasion was a powerful reminder of the Holy See’s enduring moral voice in the world and the strength of our bilateral ties.

I also take this opportunity to extend, on behalf of the Government and people of Sri Lanka, our humble respects to His Holiness Pope Leo XIV as we look forward to strengthening our engagement with the Holy See under His Holiness’s esteemed leadership.

Today, as we celebrate this golden jubilee of our diplomatic ties, we reflect with pride on the multifaceted engagement between Sri Lanka and the Holy See, particularly in the areas of religion, education, healthcare, interfaith dialogue, and humanitarian cooperation. I also take this opportunity to note the enduring support and contribution of the Catholic community who serve as a bridge in Sri Lanka–Vatican relations.

The Catholic Church in Sri Lanka plays a significant role in nation-building, social cohesion, social services, and charity work for the poor and marginalised people in the country. The Catholic community with its multi- ethnic composition, plays a key role in promoting reconciliation that is widely respected across all communities.

During the discussions today, I took the opportunity to appreciate the assistance that the Holy See extended over the past five decades to Sri Lanka and reaffirm the commitment of Sri Lanka to continue to strengthen our multifaceted bilateral relations.  The discussions that Archbishop Gallagher had with H.E. the President, the Hon. Prime Minister, and me were opportunities to share first-hand the developments in Sri Lanka following the elections of last year, the steps taken by our Government in stabilising the economy, ensuring genuine reconciliation amongst our people, combating bribery and corruption, as well as improving good governance, accountability and human rights.  As Sri Lanka continues its journey toward lasting peace, reconciliation, and prosperity, we view the Holy See as a partner and a steadfast advocate for dialogue, inclusivity, and the protection of religious freedom for all communities.

We look forward to exploring new avenues for collaboration, particularly on global issues such as environmental sustainability and the challenges facing developing nations. We also expressed Sri Lanka’s readiness to collaborate closely with the Holy See at the United Nations and other multilateral fora on matters of shared interest.

We are confident that the excellent relations between the Holy See and Sri Lanka will continue to flourish, promoting greater understanding and serving the common good of the people of Sri Lanka”.