Aspects of Ceylon/Sri Lanka Foreign Relations – 1948 to 1976

In August this year it will be 50 years since Sri Lanka hosted the fifth Non-Aligned Summit in Colombo – the high point in our foreign relations. I thought it appropriate in that context to comment on Ceylon/Sri Lanka’s foreign policy until that time. The Prime Minister, who was the head of the government then was the Minister of Defence and External Affairs, in terms of the Constitution of Ceylon. That changed in 1972, although it continued in practice until 1977. The fact that the Prime Minister was also the Foreign Minister, gave a higher profile to foreign policy making. This was particularly conducive to Sri Lanka’s relations with India.

Sri Lanka’s foreign policy between 1948 and 1956 was oriented towards the West. Attached to the Constitution of Ceylon was a Defence Agreement with the United Kingdom. For instance, officer cadets of the armed forces were trained at Sandhurst, Dartmouth and Cranwell in the UK. The period between 1948 and 1956 was one which could be described as a western oriented foreign policy. After 1956, Ceylon moved towards a more neutral and non-aligned stance.

Between 1948 and 1977, whatever the government, Ceylon/Sri Lanka was specially concerned in maintaining close and friendly relations with India. Prime Ministers D.S. Senanayake, S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike, Dudley Senanayake and Sirimavo Bandaranaike, had very friendly relations with Indian Prime Ministers Nehru, Shastri and Indira Gandhi. There was a kind of a special relationship. It is the breakdown of that close and cordial relationship of the two countries which led to much unrest in Sri Lanka later.

Between 1948 and 1970, Sri Lanka’s foreign policy was largely concerned with bilateral relations. There was no strong focus on multilateral and UN institutions. Foreign relations were largely of a bilateral nature. Between 1970 and 1977, there was a significant change in Sri Lanka’s foreign policy. There was a strong engagement with multilateral institutions especially of the UN system.

There is one exception to bilateralism of this time, and that is the Commonwealth. Since about 1950, Ceylon/Sri Lanka has been a part of the Commonwealth group. That is the first inter-governmental arrangement that Ceylon was part of. The Commonwealth played an important part in our foreign relations. It assisted Ceylon to establish close links with countries like, Australia, New Zealand and Canada.

There were significant aid relationships with these countries and with the United Kingdom. Canada in particular had a close relationship with Ceylon. Canadian Prime Minister, Pierre Trudeau visited Sri Lanka in 1971. The Commonwealth Summit enabled Sri Lanka to interact with other leaders in an informal way. The Commonwealth summits were informal gatherings round a table conducted in English. Mrs. Bandaranaike, as Prime Minister for 10 years, attended three or four summits during her tenure.

Ceylon also played an important role in supporting the establishment of a Commonwealth Secretariat in London. It is through the Commonwealth mainly that Sri Lanka urged that the Apartheid regime in South Africa be dismantled. The Commonwealth also had other subsidiary organizations like the Commonwealth Foundation, Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Commonwealth Press Union. It still has the potential for Sri Lanka to play a useful role.

Let me briefly describe some of the key events in our foreign policy between 1948 and 1976.

= In 1950, Ceylon, along with Australia initiated what was later called the Colombo Plan. It was initially called the Spender/Jayewardene Plan for technical cooperation in South and South-East Asia. Spender was the Foreign Minister of Australia, and JRJ was the Finance Minister of Ceylon.

= J.R. Jayewardene’s historic speech at the San Francisco Conference for the Peace Treaty with Japan in 1950. Ceylon waived reparations from Japan. This laid the basis for a strong friendship between Japan and Sri Lanka which has lasted.

= The Rice-Rubber Pact with China in 1953. This was an initiative of R.G. Senanayake, then Minister of Trade. This has led to a long standing friendship with China.

= Ceylon was admitted as a member of the UN in 1954. This opened up new opportunities and new challenges for the conduct of foreign policy. We now have 70 years of experience of working with the UN. This is a large subject on which I will not expand. The Non-Aligned Movement itself was born in the UN context.

= The Sirima-Shastri Pact on citizenship issues, more or less settled the question of plantation labour.

= Sirimavo Bandaranaike’s made the proposal for the Indian Ocean to be a Zone of Peace in 1963.

= Mrs. Bandaranaike’s mediatory role in the Sino-Indian dispute in 1963 was another highlight. She visited both countries in high profile visits.

= So also the Katchathivu Agreement with India which was signed by Mrs. Bandaranaike and Mrs. Indira Gandhi.

= In 1975, Sri Lanka offered landing rights to Pakistani aircraft on their way to East-Pakistan (now Bangladesh). This irritated India but was not a hostile act against India. It led to a strong friendship with Pakistan and an estranged relationship with Bangladesh.

= In 1973, resulting from the oil crisis, new initiatives were taken by the government to improve relations with the Middle East. A Cabinet Committee on the Middle East was established. The Cabinet Secretary, M.S. Alif, was sent on a mission to the Middle East followed by Minister Felix Dias Bandaranaike.

= Mrs. Bandaranaike visited Baghdad, Iraq, to meet with Sadam Hussain in 1975. A concessionary oil agreement was signed. Baghdad was expected to host the Non-Aligned Summit after Colombo in 1979. However, in view of the invasion of Kuwait by Sadam Hussain and the subsequent war with the U.S., it did not take place.

= In 1973, Sri Lanka sponsored Gamani Corea to be the Secretary General of UNCTAD. He played a key role in the North-South negotiations at that time. A little after, Sri Lanka sponsored Shirley Amarasinghe to be President of the UN General Assembly and later to be the Chairman of the Law of the Sea Conference. This conference led to one of the important treaties of all time regarding the Law of the Sea.

Between 1971 and 1976, Sri Lanka’s foreign policy was more oriented towards interventions in the multilateral system than on bilateral relations. This was a time of grave economic hardship for Sri Lanka – the oil price hike by OPEC in 1973, and the world food crisis. Mrs. Bandaranaike was particularly concerned in making Sri Lanka’s foreign policy more attuned to solving these crises.

In 1974 Sri Lanka hosted the last ECAFE (the name was changed to ESCAP in Colombo at that year’s annual sessions). It was the first conference ever to be held at the BMICH in Colombo. Mrs. Bandaranaike made a major proposal to establish a World Fertilizer Fund (WFF). This proposal was adopted at ECAFE level. Later at the UN General Assembly Sessions in 1974, a joint Sri Lanka-New Zealand proposal was adopted to establish an International Fertilizer Supply Scheme. This scheme functioned for a short time and channeled some fertilizers from developed-to-developing countries. However, the multinational chemical industry was strongly opposed for this scheme, and it did not last long.

At the World Food Conference in 1974 in Rome, Sri Lanka proposed an establishment of an International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) specially focusing on irrigation development in poor countries. The proposal for IFAD was adopted on a separate OPEC initiative and it was established for general agricultural development. In the WFC (FAO) archives, the Sri Lankan proposal is listed as document No.1. For her initiatives in the field of food and agriculture, Prime Minister, Mrs. Bandaranaike was awarded the CERES Medal by the FAO.

Let me refer to a feature of Sri Lankan foreign policy making between 1965 and 1977. In 1965, Prime Minister Dudley Senanayake established a new Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs under him. Dr. Gamani Corea was the Permanent Secretary. This Ministry was entrusted with the task of managing Sri Lanka’s international economic relations including the United Nations. This system continued under Mrs. Bandaranaike between 1970 and 1977. The Ministry of Planning interacted closely with the Foreign Ministry in managing Sri Lanka’s economic relations.

Between 1971 and 1976, prior to the Non-Aligned Summit in 1976, Sri Lanka was actively engaged in the affairs of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and the Group of 77. The Group emerged in the aftermath of the establishment of UNCTAD in 1964. It is a group of developing countries and was expected to manage the negotiations within UNCTAD on what was broadly termed as North-South issues.

The Group of 77 operated mainly in Geneva and within UNCTAD. The NAM operated mainly within the UN in New York. While the G-77 included all developing countries, the NAM consisted only those countries which had no military affiliations with the West. For example, Pakistan and Philippines were not members of NAM. Sri Lanka, prior to the Non-Aligned Summit in 1976, worked closely with the Group of 77 stressing the significance of North-South negotiations on economic issues.

Sri Lanka in the run-up to the NAM Summit stressed more the economic aspects of the movement instead of the political issues of the time. Sri Lanka was anxious to be truly Non-Aligned between East and West unlike Algeria and Cuba – hosts of the fourth and sixth Summits – who were more inclined towards an anti-Western stance.

An understated and not much recognized influence on foreign policy between and 1948 and 1976 was Ceylon/Sri Lanka’s dependence on foreign aid. Bilateral and multilateral aid was a significant part of Sri Lanka’s foreign exchange receipts. Aid flows were mainly from the Western countries or from the multilateral banks which were largely controlled by the western powers.

To give one illustration, in the 1970s U.S. food aid under the PL480 programme amounted to about one-third of all cereal consumption in Ceylon. While Ceylon/Sri Lanka engaged in NAM and Group of 77 politics, its dependence on aid made it necessary that it was truly non-aligned and not anti-Western.

I have written this note from memory. I hope it will be of some use to future scholars.

(Leelananda De Silva, was Senior Asst. Secretary and Director Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs – 1970 to 1977. He was Secretary General of the Economic Committee of the fifth Non-Aligned Summit)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.