Sathosa losses

The COPE (Committee on Public Enterprises) has revealed that Sathosa suffered a staggering loss of Rs. 15.1 billion due to irregular rice imports in 2014 and 2015, according to media reports. Losses incurred by Sathosa may not surprise anyone, but the question is why successive governments have not done anything about it for 10 long years. Those who are out of power pledge to root out corruption in Sathosa, and other state institutions and muster popular support to win elections, but after being ensconced in power, they do more of what their predecessors did and line their pockets.

In 2014, the SLFP-led UPFA government was in power, and the UNP-led UNF was voted into office in January 2015. A section of the UPFA closed ranks with the UNF, which failed to obtain a working majority in Parliament. Their joint administration, the Yahapalana government, vowed to eliminate bribery and corruption and set up a separate secretariat for that purpose. The JVP backed that government and was actively involved in the Anti-Corruption Secretariat, headed by Ananda Wijepala, who is the current Public Security Minister. The Yahapalana government became as corrupt as its predecessors.

Sathosa has become a metaphor for corrupt deals, most of which have not been investigated thoroughly. Some of its rackets have been probed by governments to settle political scores instead of bringing all culprits to justice and making a serious effort to recover the colossal losses, which are passed on to the public in the form of tax and tariff increases.

Some of the losses Sathosa has suffered due to rice imports over the years should be blamed on the big-time rice millers, who create artificial rice shortages through market manipulations, prompting governments to import rice ahead of the commencement of the paddy harvesting seasons. After imported rice enters the local market, the millers release their own stocks, bringing down the prices of rice. When the prices of rice drop, the millers can buy paddy at unconscionably low prices at the expense of the farming community. Imported rice remains unsold in government warehouses including those of Sathosa as the public prefers the local varieties of rice to the imported ones. Unsold rice ends up as animal feed, and the millers manipulate the rice market again by creating rice shortages and jacking up prices. They exploit both the consumer and farmer alike with impunity thanks to their political connections. Campaigners for farmers’ rights have exposed the millers’ sordid operations, but no action has been taken. Even the incumbent government has baulked at taking on the millers’ Mafia despite its rhetoric and adopted the practice of importing rice to overcome artificially created shortages.

Sathosa has become a huge drain on the state coffers. If corruption, which has eaten into its vitals, is eliminated, with its management being entrusted to a team of experts of integrity, without political interference, it can be turned around and revitalised to serve the interests of the public better.

It is incumbent upon the JVP-led NPP government, which came to power, making a solemn pledge to rid the country of bribery and corruption, to order a high-level probe into corrupt deals that have ruined Sathosa over the past several decades, and prosecute all those who are responsible for them. But the question is whether it will have the courage to do so, for some of its own members are facing allegations of corrupt deals.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.