History repeats itself – Ukraine is Putin’s Czechoslovakia

The Munich Agreement, signed in September 1938, permitted Hitler to annex Sudetenland in exchange for a pledge of peace. Sudetenland was a border region of Czechoslovakia with a significant German-speaking population.

The Crimean Peninsula and the Donbas region, areas of Ukraine with high Russian-speaking populations, is now under the control of Russia.

The primary Munich Agreement was signed by UK Prime Minister, Neville Chamberlain, German Chancellor, Adolf Hitler, French Prime Minister, Edouard Daladier and Italian Dictator, Benito Mussolini.

Under the terms of the agreement, German troops were allowed to occupy Sudetenland; in return, Hitler agreed to stop any further territorial expansion.

Significantly, representatives from Czechoslovakia, the sovereign nation whose land was being carved up by foreign parties, was not invited to the conference.

Following the Munich Agreement, Chamberlain and Hitler signed a separate one-page, joint Anglo-German declaration, that “both nations considered the Munich Agreement as symbolic of their desire never to go to war with one another again”.

On his return to London, Chamberlain was hailed as the hero who guaranteed “Peace for our time”. However, according to his book, Mein Kampf, Hitler had a long-term plan for a German empire in Europe long before the Munich Agreement was signed in 1938.

Chamberlain’s “our time” lasted till March, 1939, just six months later, when Hitler occupied the rest of Czechoslovakia. Britain and France declared war on Germany when Hitler invaded Poland in September, 1939.

World War II began in 1939, and the Germans were well on their way to victory, until the United States of America entered the war in 1941. There is no doubt that Germany would have gained control of a great part of Europe if not for the intervention of the Americans.

Fast-forward to 2014, when Russian dictator Vladimir Putin invaded Crimea and annexed it from Ukraine. Putin was a lieutenant colonel of the KGB, the Russian equivalent of the US Central Intelligence Agency, in 1991, at the dismantling of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). He resigned from the KGB and joined the government of Boris Yeltsin.

Putin was formally elected President in 2000, and his role evolved into a dictatorship with the bypassing of term limits in 2008, During this time, opposition leaders were jailed or killed, independent media forced to shut down with the introduction of new “fake laws” to criminalize criticism of Putin and the government term limits were constitutionally amended to allow Putin remain as president till 2036, when he would be 84-years-of age.

Putin began a full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February, 2022, which is proving to be the deadliest war in Europe since World War II, an escalation of the occupation of Crimea in 2014. Negotiations for a ceasefire have been in the works, with the nations of NATO and the United States considering terms and conditions that have so far been unacceptable to both Russia and Ukraine. The European nations and the US have been helping Ukraine with armaments and money, because they have a joint national stake in curbing the territorial expansionist ambitions of Putin. Which would be inevitable if he were allowed to annex Ukraine.

President Trump has had a strangely cordial relationship with Putin over the years, considering that Russia has been the main adversary of the US since World War II. Trump has been assuring the American public that he alone can bring peace to the conflict, even stating that the war would not have started had he been the US president! His method so far has been courting Putin at various venues, most recently with a Red-Carpet Summit in Alaska. Putin was his charming self, playing Trump like Nero’s fiddle, like he has been doing for a decade or more.

Trump’s servility towards Putin and his reluctance to take any action against Russia after the illegal invasion of Ukraine has wrought wild speculations and conspiracies over the years, even that Putin may have possession of some of the more salacious of the Epstein papers.

The Alaska Summit was a desperate, last-ditch effort of Trump to end the Russia-Ukraine conflict, which he needed to establish his opinion as the World’s Greatest Peacemaker. In his narcissistically-addled imagination, he has brought peace to wars in seven – or is it eight, he has lost count – wars in countries, some 3,000 thousand miles from each other, whose names he can’t even pronounce, others which are raging even now, the wildest being his constant boast that he was responsible in mediating in the brief conflict between India and Pakistan.

That four-day conflict in Kashmir was settled by mutual mediation. When the Indian government heard of Trump’s lies about his role, an official statement was issued by the office of Prime Minister Modi, that the conflict had been mediated by the protagonists, and that there had been no communication whatsoever with any official of the US government during this time.

Trump’s highly acclaimed role of negotiating a ceasefire between Hamas and Israel, hit world headlines last week. His magnificent portrait adorned the cover of TIME magazine. Sadly, the “ceasefire” lasted three days, when Israel resumed bombing in Gaza. Trump’s quest for the Holy Grail, the Nobel Prize for Peace, which his hated predecessor, President Obama, was awarded merely for potential, which he achieved in spades during his terms of presidency, seems to be receding into the distant shadows of Trump’s paranoid resentment.

President Putin rewarded Trump for his lavish hospitality in Alaska by resuming bombing of Kiev the day after he returned to Moscow. He also gave Trump a contemptuous middle finger by attending a two-day Summit hosted by President XI Jinping in the northern city of Tianjin, to flaunt China’s global leadership and its close relationship with Russia and India. The Summit was attended by more than 20 world leaders, including Indian Prime Minister Modi and Turkish President Erdogan.

Last week, with supposed “consultation” with Putin, and no communication with President Zelensky or members of NATO, Trump came up with a 28-point ceasefire agreement. The document was obviously drafted by Russia, as 25 points were designed to gift Russia all it had claimed, the other three to make Ukraine considerably weaker. It was more a surrender than a treaty.

The fact that the negotiations, which included neither President Zelensky nor any other NATO member nation, were completely favorable to Russia, was confirmed by a telephone call leaked last week by Bloomberg. The call clearly indicated that Trump chief negotiator, Steve Witkoff coached the Kremlin on how best to win Trump’s confidence, confirming without doubt that Witkoff’s loyalty lay with the Russians.

The United States issued an ultimatum that the 28-point “ceasefire agreement” agreed to by neither Russia nor Ukraine, be signed before Thursday, November 27, or else the United States will withdraw from any participation in the conflict. As of Thursday night, there has been no response from Ukraine. Putin has completely ignored the ultimatum, but agreed that the 28-point plan submitted constitutes the basis for “serious talks”.

There was widespread condemnation of the agreement, especially amongst the nations of NATO. Just as Hitler broke the Munich Agreement within months and annexed Czechoslovakia, Putin will agree to a ceasefire, break it within months, and annex the entire nation of Ukraine. The starting point of his dream of the restoration of at least a part of the glory of the Superpower of the USSR.

Hitler started off with the invasion of Czechoslovakia, working towards a unified Europe, led by the Master race of Germany – Deutschland Uber Alles! Unfortunately his dreams were foiled with the entry of the United States of America, which assured the defeat of the Nazis.

The United States is on the brink of betraying NATO, the longest peacetime alliance in modern history. It is likely that Trump will remain neutral, imposing no punitive sanctions against Russia on its illegal invasion of Ukraine.

The United States military has carried out at least seven strikes on alleged Venezuela drug smuggling vessels, killing at least 27 people. The attacks were authorized by President Trump, who confirmed that he has also ordered the CIA to carry out secret operations in Venezuela against the Maduro regime.

The Trump administration has failed to provide any evidence that the targeted boats were carrying narcotics bound for the US, and has defended the bombings as part of its war against international drug trafficking and terrorism.

However, Volker Turk, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights , stated on Friday that such attacks “violate international human rights law” and must stop immediately”.

The military personnel who conduct these illegal bombings are doing so at the illegal orders of their superior officers, ultimately the Commander-in-Chief, President, Donald Trump.

This is not the first occasion that Trump has issued orders against basic law, the constitution and, most importantly, with sheer cruelty. During his first term, he ordered the top US military leader, General Mark Millie to “crack skulls” and “beat the f… out” of protesters against police brutality and structural racism. In the face of opposition of Millie, then Attorney General William Barr and then Secretary of War, Mark Esper, Trump said, “Well, then shoot them in the legs”! That illegal order, fortunately, was not carried out.

However, Trump’s illegal orders have been carried out more often than not during his second term. His administration has deported immigrants, legal and undocumented, without due process, to be held in inhumane conditions; deployed federal troops to democratic cities like Los Angeles, Chicago and Portland, to quell peaceful protests and enforce immigration laws. The Posse Comitatus Act is a US federal law that “limits the use of federal military personnel to enforce domestic law”. Trump’s deployment of federal troops to states and cities without any request from their governors and mayors, indeed at their vehement protests, clearly violates this federal law.

On November 18, 2025, six Democratic members of Congress, led by Naval Commander, Astronaut and Senator from Arizona, Mark Kelly, who had all served in the US military, issued a video with the clear message to the military that “You can/must refuse illegal orders”.

At the very least, the message contained in the video is not only legal but perfectly constitutional within the First Amendment of free speech. However, top constitutional scholar, Donald Trump, did not agree. According to him, the release of such a video to the public constitutes a clear case of “seditious behavior, punishable by death”.

The Department of Justice is actually considering prosecuting these cases.

Sri Lanka’s vanishing snakes: Scientists warn policy paralysis is driving a silent crisis

More countries now require tobacco plain packaging and graphic health warnings on cigarette packages

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.