Ceylon Chamber briefs foreign diplomats on Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit

Foreign diplomatic missions in Sri Lanka were briefed on the upcoming Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit (SLEIS) 2026 organised by The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce at a session organised by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, providing an opportunity to outline the Summit’s focus and encourage greater international engagement with Sri Lanka’s investment and business agenda.

The briefing provided representatives of diplomatic missionsan overview of SLEIS 2026, which will be held on 12 and 13 October 2026 under the theme “Positioning Sri Lanka in a Changing Global Economy: Resilience, Reform, and the Future of Economic Policy.” The Summit will bring together policymakers, business leaders, investors, economists and international stakeholders to examine Sri Lanka’s economic direction and the opportunities emerging from its reform process.

The programme will look beyond the immediate concerns of economic stabilisation to issues that will shape Sri Lanka’s next phase of growth, including investment, trade, competitiveness, economic policy and the country’s position within a changing global economy.

Addressing the diplomatic representatives, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Arun Hemachandra said the Summit comes at an important point in Sri Lanka’s economic journey. With greater stability now being established, he said the focus needs to shift towards positioning Sri Lanka for its next phase of growth. He noted that the SLEIS programme reflects this broader agenda, moving the conversation beyond stabilisation towards resilience, growth and longer-term economic opportunities.

He also encouraged diplomatic missions to carry the message and opportunities emerging from SLEIS to their respective business communities, investment promotion agencies, investors and chambers of commerce, helping connect Sri Lanka’s economic priorities with potential international partners.

Director General, Economic Affairs at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Manori Mallikaratchy, highlighted the role of the private sector in strengthening the economy. She noted that structured private sector participation was essential for economic diplomacy to translate into tangible commercial and investment outcomes, making stronger connections between government, business and international partners increasingly important.

Chairperson of the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce Krishan Balendra,emphasised that SLEIS 2026 comes against the backdrop of significant economic reforms and will provide a platform to communicate the progress made while looking ahead to the opportunities that these reforms can create. He noted that the Summit would support efforts to reposition Sri Lanka as a destination with a clearer growth story and opportunities for investment, while giving international and local stakeholders a space to engage directly on the country’s economic direction.

The briefing also highlighted the role of SLEIS as a platform for international business engagement. With participation expected from international investors, business leaders, policymakers and other economic stakeholders, the Summit will provide opportunities to exchange perspectives, build connections and examine areas where Sri Lanka can compete more effectively in the global economy.

The 26th edition of the Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit will take place on 12–13 October at the Shangri-La Colombo.