Leapmotor C10 hits Sri Lankan roads to cure range anxiety

In a significant milestone for Sri Lanka’s electric mobility landscape, Carmart (Pvt) Ltd, the authorized importer and distributor for Leapmotor in Sri Lanka, proudly handed over the first batch of brand-new Leapmotor C10 Self-Charging EVs to their excited owners this week.

The occasion marked the official introduction of the Leapmotor C10 self-charging EV to Sri Lanka – the first REEV (Range-Extended Electric Vehicle) SUV in the country. It combines flexibility of full EV economy and limitless range between charges with an advanced safety suite, and exceptional comfort. With its sleek design, smart features, and an impressive combined range of up to 1,150km (NEDC), the C10 redefines convenience by eliminating range anxiety while delivering a seamless, modern EV driving experience.

Hosted at Carmart’s showroom in Union Place Colombo, the handover ceremony was more than a simple delivery; it was an immersive experience for new Leapmotor C10 owners. Carmart’s senior management personally welcomed and thanked the first customers, who described the C10 as “the perfect blend of technology, comfort, and practicality.”

CEO of Carmart, Yasendra Amerasinghe, stated, “Today marks an important step forward in Sri Lanka’s journey toward practical electric mobility. The Leapmotor C10 isn’t just an EV, it represents a smarter, more efficient way to drive, and we are proud to introduce it to pioneering customers who truly appreciate innovation.”

As interest in electric mobility continues to rise locally, the Leapmotor C10 stands out with its sophisticated design; intelligent engineering, with suspension tuned by Maserati engineers; and exceptional comfort. Backed by Stellantis – Europe’s second largest carmaker, and Carmart’s 75 years of trust, customer focus, and after-sales strength, Leapmotor is set to become a compelling choice among Sri Lankan drivers seeking high-quality modern mobility with exceptional value.

With future production quickly selling out, the Leapmotor C10 is poised to make a strong mark on Sri Lanka’s automotive landscape — a symbol of confidence, innovation, and the future of convenient everyday electric driving.

CEAT Kelani treats top dealers to a spectacular Swiss adventure

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.