Why Thailand ended visa-free entry for Sri Lankans: Herath explains

Colombo, Sep. 8 (Daily Mirror) - Illegal activities allegedly committed by Sri Lankan nationals while using Thailand’s visa-free facility contributed to the decision to end visa-free entry for Sri Lankan passport holders, Cabinet Spokesman and Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath said.

Addressing the weekly Cabinet media briefing, Herath said the Thai Government had conducted a review of its visa arrangements for countries around the world and identified 60 countries, including Sri Lanka, for which the visa-free facility would be withdrawn.

He said the Thai authorities had identified illegal activities allegedly carried out by some Sri Lankan nationals who had entered the country under the visa-free arrangement.

The Minister cited several incidents involving drug smuggling, including a recent case in which Buddhist monks were allegedly involved in bringing Kush drugs into Thailand.

Thailand’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs has announced that revised visa exemption and Visa on Arrival (VoA) measures were published in the Royal Gazette on August 31 and will take effect from September 15.

Herath said the Sri Lankan Government had held bilateral discussions with the Thai authorities regarding the matter.

He said the Thai Government had proposed signing a bilateral agreement with Sri Lanka to establish a special visa arrangement.

“The Bill has been referred to the Department of Immigration and Emigration and will subsequently be forwarded to the Attorney General’s Department. We hope to sign this bilateral agreement with the Thai Government in the future,” he said.

“Once the agreement is signed, Sri Lanka will be able to obtain a visa category under a special arrangement. All necessary steps are currently being taken to make this programme a success,” the Minister said.

Herath also said he would travel to Thailand on September 14 to sign an agreement relating to the employment of Sri Lankan workers in Thailand.

He said he also expected to discuss the proposed new bilateral visa arrangement during his visit.