Picking up English during my time at Thurstan College

George E de Silva was the Member for Kandy in the State Legislative Assembly before Ceylon gained Independence. He was famously known as “Our” or “Apey George”, mainly for his alleged amusing malapropisms. Many of these stories were mostly made up by the British, to ridicule a person who stood up to them, not taking a backward step.

After Independence in 1948, Ceylon had two Houses in the Parliament, House of Representatives and the Senate. The former had elected members and the latter nominated members. A Bill before being enacted by legislation had to be passed by both Houses. The Ceylonese model of government was based on the British Parliament, which has two houses, House of Representatives and the House of Lords.

During WWII, Japan bombed Colombo. This was in 1944. In the State Assembly, according to folklore, “Our George” allegedly took umbrage at this outrage and on the floor of the Assembly, made a statement with too much emphasis on the letter “B”. He went on to say that “Bom-b-ers are Bom-b-ing” Ceylon. (Hyphenation being for clarity and to reflect the tone.) NM Perera, seated in the adjoining seat in the Assembly, whispered “George, George, B silent”, where upon George entered future folklore immortality when he allegedly said; “Sorry, Ombers are Ombing Ceylon!!”

There was no internet or social media to contradict or deny these versions at the times. By word of mouth these jokes or stories spread through the English educated elite, especially the Britishers in power at the time, who wanted to downplay and embarrass locals. Burghers being collective name given to descendants of the Portuguese, Dutch or British Colonial masters plus the upper echelon locals gladly joined to spread the message.

My own “Georgesque” moment came in 1952, in Primary-1 at Thurstan. The teacher asked me, “Nihal, where does your father work?” I said, “My father walks at Government Stores”. And the class erupted in laughter, and Miss Silva, the teacher, too suppressed her giggle. I was at a loss, till a classmate, sitting next to me said “Nihal, Nihal, it is Works.” And I said: “My father Walks and Works at Government Stores.” More laughter, at higher decibels and sustained, until Miss Silva’s firm gesture of a finger on her lips subdued them. She explained to me and to the now attentive class, the difference between the two verbs “walk” and “work”, citing examples. Understandably, I became the butt of many jokes, but not in a vicious sense. The classmate who tried to save the day for me being Mithila Gunaratne who now lives in New York.

The next experience I had was at the hands of a teacher, and quite literally, physically so. Mr Wickremesinghe who taught us Sinhala Language in 1953, drove a green Hillman Minx and wore the National Dress, the “Arya Sinhala dress”, with a green shawl tossed over his shoulders. Green was also the colour of the United National Party then in power.

For about three periods of that particular week Mr Wickremesinghe taught and analyzed the Sinhala verses composed by the Tibetan born Buddhist Monk, Mahinda Thero to us seven year-olds. The final verse related to the deportation of the last king of Ceylon, Sri Wickrema Rajasinghe, by the British Colonial masters by ship.

He then gave an assignment to the class, “Compose a new verse similar to the following last verse”. The last verse of the string was;

The subject given was was Honourable Don Stephen Senanayake, the then Prime Minister of Ceylon. We ‘buttas’(tiny tots) did not attribute any political significance to the master’s attire or the colour of his car. The colour of the Prime Minister’s United National Party (UNP) being green did not register with us.

In the following week we were called on to recite our compositions. Who better than my classmate to produce an original in Kavyatilaka (which translates to ‘Star of Poetry’)? He praised Mr Senanayake with an excellent original. It was ‘pure nectar’ to the listener from a master craftsman.

The master was very happy; in fact, beaming. Next was Mahilal Kottegoda. His philosophy was simple, as we were to soon find out. No problem for Mahilal, about not giving any consideration to the Copyrights Act. In the second line he had substituted the word “රාජලේ (royal blood) with “සේනානායකලේ (blood of Senanyake). That was all, a considerable effort, one might say.

The master threw a fit. “You bloody idiot, when was our heroic leader Mr Senanyake deported from Ceylon? This warrior, you idiot, he is still our Prime Minister!” He came near Mahilal and glowered, adding “You said that Mr Senanayake is leaving the country. No such luck, you bloody idiot”. All this in pithy Sinhala.

I dreaded my turn and was hoping that the master will bypass me. I was seated next to Mahilal. No such luck. He called me and I proceeded to be next to his desk, as others before me had done. I faced the class and the teacher Mr Wickremesinghe was seated at his desk. I was standing on his right. All of my three feet and 45 pounds.

And my response, shivering and turning to him on my left, was “I forgot Sir!”. He got up from his chair and came by my side and on my right side. “What did you say?” he asked in a loud voice. “I forgot Sir,” was my weak response. His reaction was swift. He gave me a thundering slap, with his right hand, and then when I was reeling, with both hands he literally “Slam Dunked” my face on to the desk. Then he barked; “Go and sit down” and walked out of the class. I could feel the bump on my head.

I sheepishly went home and when my mother detected the bump, she asked me how it happened. I said that the leather ball hit me whilst playing after school. If I had said the Master thumped me, I may have got beaten again by my parents, as “Teachers can do no wrong”.

Two weeks later Mahilal was missing from Class. He had migrated next door to Royal Primary as we were to find out very much later. Whether my getting a beating had anything to do with his move, I would not know, but his father was a bigwig at the Department of Education.

Thurstan was a multilingual school with separate streams in Sinhala, Tamil and English. Yet, there was the opportunity to mix during the lunch interval, playing cricket, and improving one’s English as we interacted.

Two Masters were standouts and left their mark on me, no pun intended here. Mr Kingsley Fernando was a jack of all trades, Physical Education, English and General Intelligence among his strengths. He held competitive games, which included tug-of- war, Do You Know and Spelling Bee contests for his charges, and through the intermingling, we developed our aptitudes and got to know each other. Mr Fernando was way ahead of his time with “Lateral Thinking” and long before Edward de Bono coined the now oft repeated phrase in the 1990s.

The other was the stern looking, “moustachioed” Mr P B Weerasekera who took Arithmetic during the final year of Primary Class Year-5. He was a very good teacher, with the class listening to him in pin drop silence. An act of respect for his teaching abilities. Both teachers as their final acts was to make me conversant with two “idiomatic” English phrases on the last day of school in December 1956.

The Ananda College and Royal College Entrance Exams were held on the same day, a Saturday in November 1956, and results were posted on the respective Notice Boards 48 hours later, on Monday morning. The exams were held at the same time to prevent double dipping. It consisted of three papers of 40 minutes’ duration each. They were:

Fortunately, six years after my experience at the Ananda entrance test, the General Knowledge paper was not a worry for me. I was elated on Monday to find my name among the 140 who had gained entrance to the First Form at Royal College from 1957. Seven from our class and seven from the Tamil stream made it, making a total of fourteen from Thurstan. Thus, Thurstan produced 50% of the total outside intake of 28. Next best performing school being our rival in the field of sports ‘St Thomas’ College”(STC). A mark of respect by the respective parents at STC indeed!! Two of my classmates made it to Ananda. And later to the University of Ceylon.

The end of my time at Thurstan came on the first Friday of December 1956, the last day of the third term. I was sad to leave Thurstan. Of the seven who got through to Royal from our class, one was a surprise to all including the teachers. Addressing him, Mr Fernando said “You were the bolt from the blue”; and Mr Weerasekera, “You were the dark horse”. Since the student concerned was very dark, I thought that Mr W was referring to the student’s complexion.

So, even on my last day at Thurstan my English lexis improved.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.