Macktiles expands footprint  to Attidiya with new showroom

Macksons Holdings Group Managing Director Mizver Makeen ceremonially opening the latest Macktiles showroom in Attidiya, Dehiwala

Macktiles Lanka Ltd., has announced the launch of its latest showroom located at 236, Main Road, Attidiya, Dehiwala (opposite the Commercial Bank).

The grand opening for the new showroom, now bringing the latest in Macktiles’ innovation and technology to the residents of Attidiya, was held on 24 April 2026, graced by the presence of Macksons Holdings Ltd.’s leadership, showroom staff, as well as customers and well-wishers.

The distinguished invitees included Macksons Holdings Group Chairman Milfer Makeen, Managing Director Mizver Makeen, Chief Executive Officer Shimmer Milfer and Senior Vice President Nilrukshi de Silva.

Also in attendance were Macksons Tiles Lanka Ltd., Chief Operating Officer Ahamed Shafee, Macktiles Lanka Ltd., Sales General Manager Niroshan Pananwala, Macksons Tiles Lanka Ltd., Head of Finance Aaqil Farzah, Macksons Paints Lanka Ltd., Sales General Manager Mihiran Opatha and Attidiya Branch Franchisee Holder Danushka Fernando.

Macksons Holdings Group Managing Director Mizver Makeen said: “This strategic expansion of our footprint opens the door for our valued customers of the Attidiya-Dehiwala area, granting them access to a world class, innovation-driven variety of high-quality ceramic tiles for commercial and domestic applications.”

Moreover, this new showroom also introduced the implementation of technology, to further tailor its offerings to suit the exact needs and desires of its loyal customers.

The showroom opening also highlighted Macktiles’ all-new 4x2 range, reintroduced its premium Batik collection, and also unveiled Macktiles’ Junior Range (Kids range) as well as the Macktiles Green series.

With a focus on quality assurance, Macktiles Lanka employs modern systems and procedures throughout its value chain, ensuring meticulous quality control overseen by an expert team. The production process adheres to stringent environmental standards, certified by ISO 14001:2015 accreditation.

Macktiles Lanka has earned a reputation as one of the most impressive business entities in Sri Lanka, winning multiple national and international awards. The company’s continuous growth and success underscore its commitment to excellence and innovation. As Macktiles Lanka continues to make strides in the local and global tile industry, the new outlet in Attidiya stands as a testament to the company’s dedication to delivering quality, style, and sophistication to its customers.