BASL’s National Labour Law Symposium to convene legal, regulatory and industry leaders

The Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) will host the 2026 National Labour Law Symposium on 23 March at Cinnamon Life, bringing together legal practitioners, policymakers, employers, human resource professionals and industry stakeholders for a full-day forum on the evolving landscape of labour law and employment relations in Sri Lanka.

The program is structured around several thematic sessions addressing key issues shaping the future of employment and labour regulation. The sessions will cover areas such as Reforming Industrial Law for Tomorrow’s Workforce, Dynamics in the Contract of Employment, Employment in a Digital World, Reshaping Statutory Obligations and Social Welfare for the Future, Balancing Compliance and  Compassion – Statutory Dues and Social Welfare, Changing Paths to Justice in Employment, and From Courts to Consensus – The New Age of Dispute Resolution.

The Keynote Address will be delivered by Justice of the Supreme Court Janak de Silva.

The program will also feature distinguished speakers including Justice Shirani Tillakawardane former Judge of the Supreme Court, Geoffrey Alagaratnam PC, Uditha Egalahewa PC, Mohamed Adamaly PC, Registrar of the Court of Appeal of Sri Lanka and President of the Labour Tribunal Judges Association Sanjeewa Fernando, UoC Senior Lecturer Prof. A. Saravesvaran AAL,-Chamantha Unanboowe PC, Lalith Perera, Commissioner of Labour, Employers’ Federation of Ceylon  Deputy Director General Adhil Khasim, Deputy Solicitor General Kanishka de Silva Balapatabendi, BASL Treasurer Pasindu Silva, AAL, EFC Co-Deputy Director General, Head of Training Yashoravi Bakmiwewa, AAL, Jayantha Fernando, AAL, Isuru Lakpura, AAL, Pradeep de Silva, AAL, Amaranath Fernando, AAL, Shanaka Gunasekere, AAL, Rakitha Abeygunawardhana, AAL, Shyamala Gomez, AAL, Prasad de Silva, AAL, Erima Tegal, AAL, Jivan Gunathilleke, AAL, Shanaka Amarasinghe, AAL, Rohan Dunuwille, AAL, Rakitha Jayatunga, AAL, Sweena Chang, AAL, and Aeinsley Silva, AAL.

BASL President Rajeev Amarasuriya said: “Labour law is an important sphere of our legal system which impacts a large segment of the community in our country, from the perspectives of both employees and employers. Over the years, the Bar Association of Sri Lanka has hosted the National Labour Law Symposium in order to maintain focus on this important area of law and to create a forum for open and frank deliberation on the improvements and developments required in this field. We are confident that this Symposium will also provide the necessary impetus for the further development and refinement of labour law.”

Labour Law Symposium Organising Committee Chairperson Manoli Jinadasa, AAL said: “The symposium is being held at a time when employment relationships are being reshaped by technology, globalisation, remote work, artificial intelligence, and shifting workforce expectations. The boundaries between employer and employee, workplace and home, and regulation and flexibility are increasingly fluid. Labour law, which has always been rooted in balancing equity and economic progress, now finds itself at a critical crossroads. Across jurisdictions, including here in Sri Lanka, we are witnessing a gradual but undeniable shift from rigid frameworks towards more adaptive and responsive regulatory models.”

Employers today are navigating complex compliance demands, reputational risks, and heightened expectations around fairness and transparency. At the same time, employees are increasingly aware of their rights, empowered by information, and seeking workplaces that value dignity, inclusion, and wellbeing.

Institutions and standard-setting bodies such as the International Labour Organisation continue to emphasise that the future of labour law must be anchored not only in productivity, but in fairness, sustainability, and human dignity.

This evolving landscape presents both challenges and opportunities. For legal practitioners, it demands deeper insight and adaptability. For employers, it calls for foresight and responsible governance. For policymakers, it requires thoughtful reform. And for all of us, it offers an opportunity to shape a more equitable and resilient world of work.

The National Labour Symposium which is held after a lapse of four years, is therefore both timely and necessary. It is a platform to exchange ideas, examine emerging trends, and reflect on how we can collectively respond to the changing realities of employment relationships.

The Registration fee for the symposium is Rs. 21,500/= For further details, please contact the BASL Program Office at 077 588 8781 or [email protected]

The Symposium’s official newspaper partner is the Daily FT; Newsfirst serves as the Electronic Media Partner.