Over 650,000 have migrated for temporary reasons - Analyst

Colombo, Sep. 22 (Daily Mirror) - Over 650,000 Sri Lankans have migrated for temporary reasons, and a bulk of them are for employment, according to a survey done in 2024.

As many as 672,249 Sri Lankans have travelled abroad and are temporarily living in other countries, a survey has revealed.

UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund) Analyst - Population and Data

Poorani Radhakrishnan, who quoted the data, said that 672,249 Sri Lankans had migrated and 86 per cent of the people were for employment.

“It is not possible to stop the brain drain, but it is possible to provide opportunities for them so that they could make a choice," Ms Radhakrishnan said.

This is revealed during a forum organised by the UNFPA, which quoted a census carried out by the Department of Census and Statistics yesterday.

UNFPA is conducting a special programme for journalists across Sri Lanka in Badulla. The three-day programme aims to strengthen media awareness and understanding of the specific needs and challenges faced by women, girls, young people, pregnant women and other vulnerable groups during emergencies, disasters and humanitarian situations.

The programme will focus on creating awareness among the media fraternity on the significance of ensuring access to sexual and reproductive health services and information, safeguarding the protection and well-being of women and girls, including during emergencies, and ensuring that their needs are taken into consideration during disaster response and recovery processes.

In addition, the programme will also enhance understanding of population data, demographic trends and findings of the 2024 Census.

The programme includes awareness sessions, discussions and field engagements, providing participants with an opportunity to gain insights into UNFPA interventions and field experiences in response to the Ditwah cyclone.

The important role of the media in reporting responsibly on the experiences of people affected by disasters, while safeguarding their privacy, dignity and safety, will also be emphasised.

With the participation of journalists representing print and electronic media, the programme seeks to strengthen understanding for more accurate, sensitive and evidence-based media reporting on health, safety, rights and population data in disaster situations.