Inflation more than triples in 7 months

Latest increase puts inflation at its highest level so far in 2026 and signals a marked reversal from subdued price environment at beginning of year

Non-food inflation, which has been running considerably higher, edged up further to 9.3%, from 9.2% in July

Inflation has more than tripled in just seven months, climbing to 8.1 percent in August, as a sharp resurgence in food prices added to the already elevated household costs, the official data showed.

The National Consumer Price Index (NCPI) inflation accelerated from 7.2 percent in July and 2.4 percent in January, extending an almost uninterrupted rise in the headline rate this year.

This latest increase puts inflation at its highest level so far in 2026 and signals a marked reversal from the subdued price environment at the beginning of the year.

The NCPI inflation trajectory has risen from 2.4 percent in January to 1.6 percent in February, 2.4 percent in March, 4.7 percent in April, 5.4 percent in May, 6.5 percent in June, 7.2 percent in July and 8.1 percent in August.

The latest acceleration was particularly pronounced in food. nflation more... Food inflation jumped to 6.6 percent in August, from 4.9 percent in July, a 1.7 percentage-point increase in a single month. It stood at just 3.4 percent in January. Non-food inflation, which has been running considerably higher, edged up further to 9.3 percent, from 9.2 percent in July. The composition of inflation also underscores the pressure on the household expenditure. Of the overall 8.1 percent year-on-year (YoY) increase, the non-food items accounted for 5.14 percentage points while food contributed 2.96 percentage points. Transport alone contributed 2.28 percentage points to annual inflation, making it one of the largest sources of price pressure. Petrol accounted for 1.14 percentage points, bus fares 0.36 points and diesel 0.16 points. Housing, water, electricity, gas and other fuels contributed another 1.20 percentage points, while restaurants and hotels added 0.52 points and education 0.35 points. The food pressures were also spread across several staples and commonly purchased items.

Fresh fish recorded the largest upward contribution, followed by dried fish, green chillies and big onions. Fresh fruits, dried chillies, milk powder, vegetables, eggs and chicken also pushed the prices higher from a year earlier. Some relief came from the lower prices for coconuts, rice and ginger. The acceleration in the annual rate came even though the prices increased only modestly from July. The overall NCPI rose 0.2 percent month-on-month, with food contributing 0.18 percentage points to the increase and the non-food items 0.08 points. The monthly price increases remain relatively contained, while the YoY inflation rate is rising rapidly, as the low-price base of 2025 drops out of the comparison. The August numbers therefore highlight not only to the renewed foodprice pressure but also to a progressively less favourable base effect feeding into headline inflation. The NCPI stood at 223.9 in August, up from 223.4 in July and 207.2 a year earlier.