PM assures special Cabinet paper for Malaiyaha people hit by Ditwah

A special meeting between Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya and representatives of islandwide civil society organisations working with people affected by Cyclone Ditwah was held on 28 March at Temple Trees.

During the meeting, several matters, including reconstruction efforts and alternative measures for those affected by Cyclone Ditwah across the country, were discussed.

The Civil Society Collective for Malaiyaha Reconstruction clearly presented the key issues affecting Malaiyaha people. These included housing and land rights, transitional shelters and basic facilities in camps, livelihoods, infrastructure, and irregularities and discrimination in the provision of relief.

Most importantly, the Collective highlighted the lack of implementation of the Tamil language, their rejection of multi-storey housing, and, as a key demand, that affected Malaiyaha people must be provided with housing and land valued at no less than Rs. 5 million. These demands were very clearly presented to the Prime Minister, Commissioner General of Essential Services Prabath, and the Secretaries of the relevant Ministries, with a request for immediate solutions.

Dr. Amarasuriya stated that she is giving special attention to these matters and informed that a Cabinet paper is to be submitted very soon on relief and infrastructure facilities for the Malaiyaha people.

Chandrakeerthi further stated that, as with other affected populations, those impacted by Cyclone Ditwah in plantation areas will also be provided with housing and land valued at no less than Rs. 5 million. Representatives of civil society organisations also strongly and collectively emphasised that multi-storey housing is unsuitable for the Malaiyaha region.

The Civil Society Collective for Malaiyaha Reconstruction remains firm that no project unsuitable for the Malaiyaha people be implemented. It further emphasised that it will continue its pressure and ongoing efforts until the rights of the affected people were fully secured.

The Civil Society Collective for Malaiyaha Reconstruction will hold a special media briefing shortly.