Superloop backs girls in tech with 1st Colombo digital learning lab

Students explore their new IT facilities at Superloop Future Minds Lab

Superloop Future Minds Lab officially being unveiled at Anuruddha Balika Maha Vidyalaya

More girls in Colombo will have hands-on access to technology after Superloop opened the Superloop Future Minds Lab at Anuruddha Balika Vidyalaya recently.

The new state-of-the-art digital learning space has transformed the school’s existing computer room into a modern technology hub, providing the students with access to laptops and all the necessary supporting infrastructure. It is designed to build practical skills in digital literacy, IT and STEM for students in Grade 01 to 13.

Early, hands-on access to technology is one of the most effective ways to build lasting digital skills and the Superloop Future Minds Lab is designed to give the students exactly that.

“Technology has the power to open doors but only when young people have the opportunity to access it, learn with it and imagine where it could take them,” said Superloop Chief Legal and Corporate Officer Tina Ooi.

“Investing in the next generation is incredibly important to Superloop, particularly for young girls, who remain underrepresented in many STEM fields. By improving access to technology and digital learning, we can help create more opportunities for the next generation of innovators, problem-solvers and leaders.”

The opening ceremony brought together Anuruddha Balika Vidyalaya students, teachers, school and religious leaders and senior Superloop representatives, including Australian Executives Tina Ooi, Ben Colman, Mehul Dave and Sri Lanka Country Lead Grant Caldwell.

For Superloop, the initiative is a natural extension of its commitment to connectivity and digital inclusion. The Superloop Future Minds Lab is designed not only to provide access to technology but also to create a platform for practical learning in digital literacy, IT, mathematics and STEM.

“The Superloop Future Minds Lab is more than a new classroom. It is an investment in what our students can become. We hope it gives every girl here the confidence to explore new possibilities and the tools to pursue careers they may never have thought possible,” said Anuruddha Balika Vidyalaya Principal Hemamali Udawatta.

Superloop is headquartered in Australia but has a significant employee footprint in Sri Lanka through its Colombo-based TechHub, which supports innovation, technology and customer experience across the business.

Country Lead Sri Lanka Grant Caldwell said the initiative reflected the important role Superloop’s Sri Lankan team plays in the company’s continued growth and success.

“Colombo is home to an incredible group of people whose expertise and dedication help power Superloop every day. The Superloop Future Minds Lab is a meaningful way for us to invest back into the community and create opportunities for young people who represent the next generation of talent and innovation.”

The Superloop Future Minds Lab is the first step in what Superloop intends to be a long-term partnership with the school and its surrounding community. Through employee volunteering and community engagement, Superloop will explore future opportunities including mentoring, career awareness sessions and activities that help the students and families understand the value of education and the pathways it can create.