Standard Chartered appoints Kumudu Munasinghe as Head of Corporate Affairs, Brand and Marketing

Standard Chartered Sri Lanka has appointed Kumudu Munasinghe as Head of Corporate Affairs, Brand and Marketing, effective 15th October 2025. In her new role, Kumudu will join the Country Management Team and will be responsible for crafting and delivering the overall strategy for Corporate Affairs, Brand and Marketing for the Sri Lanka franchise.

Kumudu, an experienced communications, PR and marketing professional, brings over 25 years of extensive cross-industry experience in the Sri Lankan corporate sector with a strong focus on ESG communications and social impact.

Prior to joining Standard Chartered, Kumudu served as a Senior Assistant Vice President at the John Keells Group acting as the Head of Corporate Communications, Head of Operations – Social Entrepreneurship Project – Plasticcycle, and Group Lead for Diversity, Equity & Inclusion. Her prior experience also includes roles at Citibank N.A. Sri Lanka.

In 2021, she was recognised at the Top 50 Professional & Career Women Awards by Women in Management and the International Finance Corporation for Excellence in Corporate Communications. Kumudu holds a Master of Science in Marketing from the University of Leicester, UK, and a Postgraduate Diploma in Marketing from CIM, UK.

Commenting on the appointment, Standard Chartered Sri Lanka CEO, Bingumal Thewarathanthri, said, “We are delighted to welcome Kumudu to the Standard Chartered Sri Lanka leadership team. Her extensive experience and proven leadership in strategic communications will be instrumental in further strengthening our brand presence and stakeholder engagement in Sri Lanka. I’m confident that under her leadership, we will continue to build meaningful connections with our clients, communities, and colleagues, reflecting Standard Chartered’s purpose of driving commerce and prosperity through our unique diversity.”

DFCC Aloka drives women’s empowerment in Jaffna with Evolution Auto

Unit Trust Association of Sri Lanka launches “Investor Awareness Initiative” to empower public to build wealth through Unit Trusts

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.