Upuldeniya raises objections in Presidential Pardon case

Colombo, Sep. 11 (Daily Mirror) - Former Commissioner General of Prisons Thushara Upuldeniya, through his lawyer, raised a preliminary objection before the Colombo Chief Magistrate, arguing that insufficient evidence had been disclosed in the B Report and subsequent reports to proceed with charges against him over allegations that he fabricated official documents to falsely claim that inmates had received Presidential pardons.

The case was called before Chief Magistrate Asanga Bodaragama, where police informed court that the Attorney General had forwarded a plaint containing two charges against Upuldeniya.

After the charges were read over to the accused, Senior Counsel Darshana Kuruppu raised a preliminary objection, arguing that the B Report and subsequent reports filed before court did not disclose sufficient evidence to proceed with the charges.

Citing a judgment of the Court of Appeal delivered by Justice Neil Iddewela, Counsel Kuruppu submitted that Upuldeniya had sent a letter to the Secretary to the Minister of Justice based on letters forwarded to him by Mohan Karunaratne, Superintendent of the Anuradhapura Prison.

Counsel submitted that Upuldeniya had acted on the communications received from the Superintendent and had subsequently brought the matter to the attention of the Secretary to the Minister of Justice.

The defence further submitted that investigations had been commenced by the Criminal Investigation Department following several social media campaigns concerning the President.

Defence Counsel maintained that the President had no involvement in the decision by the Superintendent of Anuradhapura Prison to release an inmate.

Defence Counsel also informed court that the Human Rights Commission had determined that there were no justifiable grounds for the arrest of his client.

The defence therefore challenged the sufficiency of the material placed before court and submitted that there were no adequate grounds to proceed with the charges against the former Commissioner General of Prisons.

Police sought time to respond to the preliminary objection raised by the defence.

Chief Magistrate Asanga Bodaragama accordingly fixed the case for further hearing on October 29, 2026.

Senior Counsel Darshana Kuruppu appeared for the accused with Attorney-at-Law Rajitha Kulatunga.