National tragedies and absurd sideshows

Perhaps the unfolding political drama in Sri Lanka could be considered an even better example of the Theatre of the Absurd than Samuel Beckett’s Waiting for Godot or Eugène Ionesco’s seminal absurdist work, The Bald Soprano. Deputy Minister Mahinda Jayasinghe has called for legal action against Opposition politicians for what he describes as their failure to warn the public about extreme weather events in the lead-up to the landfall of Cyclone Ditwah. He has said so in response to the Opposition’s allegation that the government failed to act on warnings issued by the Meteorological Department about floods and cyclonic winds, as early as 12 November 2025. He has claimed the government was not aware of any such warnings! Another ruling party MP has blamed Derana TV for not having alerted the public to the impending disasters although a Meteorological Department official warned of them in an interview with it! Not even King Kekille—a legendary monarch known for his absurd judgements—would have rushed to such illogical, if not moronic, conclusions. If the task of monitoring weather forecasts as well as expert views thereon and warning the public of possible disasters is to be left entirely to the Opposition or a private television station, what then is the government for?

Most political issues that undermine national interest in this country boil down to the fact that the JVP-led NPP government has an opposition mindset and the SJB-led Opposition a government mindset. More often than not, the NPP forgets that it is in power and carries out Opposition-style propaganda attacks on its opponents, and the Opposition, which is full of self-important politicians, behaves as if it governed the country.

When the 2004 tsunami struck this country, there was no economic crisis. The economy was not unstable during the Covid-19 pandemic. When the economy went into a tailspin, the pandemic was over. But today the country is reeling from the crippling impact of a mega disaster while trying to straighten up an ailing economy. Economists have warned of a possible slowdown of the economy, with the deadline for resuming debt repayment approaching. A colossal amount of state funds will have to be allocated for disaster relief and rebuilding. Foreign aid currently flowing could fizzle out if global attention shifts to a new crisis elsewhere. That is the way the cookie crumbles.

Both the government and the Opposition have failed to grasp the gravity of the post-disaster situation. Otherwise, they would not have continued their political battles at the expense of a concerted effort to manage it. They are fighting while mountains are collapsing and rivers are bursting their banks, heedless of the pitiable cries of the disaster victims, just as Nero fiddled while Rome was burning.

There is no better place than the parliament complex for the ruling party politicians and their equally pugnacious Opposition counterparts to address environmental issues related to climate change and find ways and means of managing the impact of Ditwah and preparing the country to face future weather disasters. Besides housing the national legislature, the parliamentary complex is a monument to the nation’s fatalistic attitude towards, if not reckless disregard for, natural disasters. It has been flooded at least twice.

The impact of Cyclone Ditwah is not limited to economic and political fronts; an expert has warned of a possible ecological disaster, according to our lead news item today. Professor Siril Wijesundara of the National Institute of Fundamental Studies has issued a stark warning that Sri Lanka may be facing one of the worst biodiversity losses in its recent history, yet the country still lacks a coordinated, scientific assessment of the damage. Doctors have warned of possible outbreaks of diseases, such as dysentery, dengue and rat fever. Some disaster-stricken areas are still inaccessible. Many victims have not yet received any relief.

The government alone cannot handle the post-disaster relief programmes and reconstruction projects; others must put their shoulders to the wheel. It must swallow its pride and abandon its belligerent attitude and confrontational approach before asking others to join the relief and rebuilding efforts. The self-righteous Opposition should stop settling scores with the government and seeking political mileage by criticising the ongoing programmes to deliver relief to the disaster victims and rebuild their houses and shops.

Rhetoric and absurd sideshows are of no use to the disaster victims; what they need is relief as well as help to rebuild their shattered lives.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.