Invest Sri Lanka Melbourne forums attract diaspora interest

From left: Lynear Wealth Management Co-Founder and Managing Director Dr. Naveen Gunawardane, Board of Investment of Sri Lanka Director General Dr. Sulakshana Jayawardena, SEC Chairman Senior Prof. D.B.P.H. Dissabandara, Central Bank of Sri Lanka Governor Dr. P. Nandalal Weerasinghe, Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe, HNB Managing Director and CEO Damith Pallewatte, CSE Director Ray Abeywardena, CHEC Port City Colombo Deputy Managing Director Thulci Aluwihare and moderator CSE CEO Rajeeva Bandaranaike

The Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC) and Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE), in collaboration with Port City Colombo and the Consul General of Sri Lanka for Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania, successfully hosted the Invest Sri Lanka investor forums in Melbourne, on August 18 and 19, 2026, at Hyatt Place Melbourne, Essendon Fields and Novotel Melbourne Glen Waverley, respectively.

Each forum attracted over 200 participants, comprising the members of the Sri Lankan diaspora and potential investors interested in exploring investment opportunities in Sri Lanka.

HNB Group served as the Platinum Partner, while the Australia Sri Lanka Business Council, Nalanda College Old Boys’ Association Australia, eLanka (Pty Ltd) and the CA Sri Lanka Australia Chapter supported the forum as Supporting Partners.

With a significant Sri Lankan diaspora, Australia remains an important market for strengthening economic and investment ties with Sri Lanka. The Melbourne forums provided a platform to engage with the diaspora, showcase capital market opportunities and build confidence in Sri Lanka’s economic recovery and evolving investment landscape, including the opportunities arising from the ongoing reforms and market development.

In her welcome address, Consul General of Sri Lanka for Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania Pradeepa Saram highlighted the important role of the Sri Lankan diaspora in strengthening the economic ties between Sri Lanka and Australia.

“Sri Lanka has gone through multiple turmoils, internal and external but it has also demonstrated resilience and is now moving into a new phase of economic recovery and growth. The return to growth is creating new possibilities and the capital market is one avenue through which those potentials can be explored.”

Highlighting the performance and continued evolution of Sri Lanka’s capital market, CSE Director Ray Abeywardena drew attention to the market’s strong growth, improving liquidity and expanding range of investment products.

He noted, “Last year, we recorded US $ 4.1 billion in turnover, while market capitalisation rose from US $ 19.6 billion in 2024 to a high of US $ 26.3 billion before settling at around US $ 23 billion. We raised over US $ 900 million last year and US $ 420 million so far this year, including US $ 320 million through debentures and bonds, with US $ 170 million in ESG-related products such as green and blue bonds. This demonstrates how our market is evolving beyond a single liquidity-driven stock market into a diversified market offering a wider range of investment products.”

Outlining the SEC’s role in supporting both investor protection and the continued development of the capital market, SEC Chairman Senior Prof. D.B.P.H. Dissabandara emphasised the importance of a strong regulatory framework and investor confidence.

“As the regulator of the capital market, we have three mandates: to create the market, maintain the market and regulate the market. We are no longer just a regulator; we also facilitate market development, while maintaining global professional standards and protecting investor interests. With a strong regulatory framework aligned with the global best practices, we are well positioned to further develop the market. As partners in Sri Lanka’s economic growth, please come and invest. This is a good time and an opportunity you should not miss.”

August 18, 2026: Hyatt Place Melbourne Essendon Fields, Australia Room – Melbourne

Turning to Sri Lanka’s improving macroeconomic and credit fundamentals, Central Bank of Sri Lanka Governor Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe highlighted the country’s progress towards a stronger sovereign credit position.

“All three rating agencies have re-upgraded Sri Lanka and we are now about to move into the next category, which is B-, similar to where we were before the crisis. My observation and expectation is that we already deserve to be upgraded and the indicators are sufficient for us. The opportunity is now, before the full benefit of the improving fundamentals is reflected in the market.”

Emphasising the importance of trust and stability in supporting the next phase of Sri Lanka’s economic growth, Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe noted, “We are here to build trust, share the right information and invite you to be part of our success story. The data shows that we have moved from crisis to stability and are now entering a growth phase. With institutional reforms and digital-first strategies underway, we see great potential and have confidence in the people of Sri Lanka and our diaspora, who have always supported our country during the difficult times. This is the right time to be part of this change.”

Broadening the investment case beyond Sri Lanka’s domestic market, Lynear Wealth Management Co-Founder and Managing Director Dr. Naveen Gunawardane highlighted Sri Lanka’s potential as a gateway to South Asia.

“A play on Sri Lanka is not really a single country play. It’s very much a play on South Asia and it’s a way for you to get India exposure at a low valuation level. It’s a way for you to get Pakistan and Bangladesh exposure without the political dynamics of those countries, within a very stable macro environment.”

Outlining some of the sectors presenting opportunities for investors, HNB PLC Managing Director and CEO Damith Pallewatte said, “We believe additional equity investment can significantly accelerate the growth momentum of the economy, particularly by supporting the SMEs and emerging corporates in identified growth sectors. These include renewable energy, logistics, export-oriented agriculture, high-value tourism, wellness and adventure tourism and education. With the right capital, these sectors have significant potential to scale, adopt new technologies and create greater value. These are opportunities where you can confidently support Sri Lanka’s growth through investment.”

The forum concluded with an engaging panel discussion featuring Board of Investment of Sri Lanka Director General Dr. Sulakshana Jayawardena and CHEC Port City Colombo (Pvt.) Ltd Deputy Managing Director Thulci Aluwihare, moderated by CSE CEO Rajeeva Bandaranaike.

The discussion enabled the participants to engage directly with the panellists on Sri Lanka’s economic outlook, capital market developments, investment opportunities and its position within the wider South Asian growth story.