HNB Assurance welcomes 2026 with strong momentum towards 10 in 5

HNB Assurance enters 2026 with renewed purpose and clear ambition as it moves into a defining phase of its 10 in 5 strategic journey. With the final leg toward achieving a 10% life insurance market share by 2026 now in focus, the company is gearing up for a year of transformation, innovation, and accelerated growth.

Closing 2025 on a strong note, HNB Assurance delivered outstanding results, continuously achieving growth above the industry average while strengthening its people, partnerships and brand. Industry awards, other achievements, and continued customer trust reflect the company’s strong performance and ongoing commitment to providing meaningful protection solutions for all Sri Lankans.

Commenting on the year ahead, Lasitha Wimalarathne, Executive Director / Chief Executive Officer of HNB Assurance, stated, “Guided by our 2026 theme, ‘Reimagine. Reinvent. Redefine.’, we are setting our sights beyond convention. Our aim is to reimagine what is possible for the life insurance industry, for our customers, and for the communities we serve, while laying a strong foundation for the next 25 years as a trusted life insurance partner in Sri Lanka. This year, we also celebrate 25 years of HNB Assurance, a milestone that is special in itself and a testament to the trust and support of our customers, partners and people. For us, success is not defined solely by financial performance. It is measured by the trust we earn, the promises we honor, the lives we protect, and the positive impact we create for all our stakeholders. Our ambition is clear, to be a top-tier life insurance company that sets benchmarks in customer experience, professionalism and people development.”

For HNB Assurance looking back at a year of progress and recognition, the collective efforts of the team have created a strong momentum for the year ahead.

“The progress we have made gives us strong confidence as we enter the final phase of our 10 in 5 journey. Being recognized as the Best Life Insurance Company at the Global Brand Awards 2025, receiving the National-level Silver Award for Local Market Reach and the Insurance Sector Gold Award at the National Business Excellence Awards, and being named Best Life Bancassurance Provider in Sri Lanka for the fifth consecutive year by the Global Banking and Finance Review, UK, reflect the consistency of our performance, the strength of our strategy, along with the passion, and commitment of our people.”

Cinnamon Hotels & Resorts’ acceleration of gender inclusion and the ripple effect of female leadership

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.