Nanda Pethiyagoda Wanasundara as three generations of family saw her

To those who knew her, Nanda Pethiyagoda Wanasundara or Nan to her readers, conjures up the image of a graceful lady immaculately dressed in an Osariya. But to her slew of nephews, nieces, grand-nieces and great-grandniece, she was much more than that. Beneath the aura of grace and beauty, was a woman of exemplary kindness, nuanced intelligence and empathy, and a curious juxtaposition of conscientiousness with free-spiritedness, and a heavy dollop of wit. As she approached her later years, she once wrote to her loved ones that “there is no need to mourn my death” for she had lived a full life. So, to celebrate her life and remember her for what she was -an exceptional lady whose grace and beauty was rivaled only by her inner strength and magnanimity- below is the compilation of a multi-generational ode to her memory.

A niece: Without exception, Nanda Punchi Amma was the favourite aunt of all her nieces and nephews; fun-loving, sociable, good-looking, intelligent and eternally youthful, she was the aunt whom we never thought of as being old even when she was well into her nineties.

Always one to celebrate the small things in life, I cannot but think back to the countless times we met at her home for lunch, dinner, birthdays or any other occasion that called for a celebration. The table beautifully laid with a table-cloth and serviettes and Nanda Punchi Amma herself dressed and groomed immaculately, putting us younger nieces to shame. I still remember the last time she came to my house for dinner about a month before her fall. She was, as usual, dressed beautifully in a batik lungi I had bought for her from Indonesia which she wore with a perfectly coordinated kurtha top and jewellery. My one regret is that I could not photograph that moment to remember her the way she was.

But nothing describes Nanda Punchi Amma more aptly than the phrase ‘Beautiful both inside and out’. Nanda Punchi Amma’s empathy – especially to those less fortunate than her – was unparalleled. People who served her like her daily-help Rupa who did the cleaning, driver Aravinda and three-wheel driver Sampath were all fed like kings by her on a daily basis. Every so often she would even give Rupa a wine or beer and insist that she takes an afternoon nap! Even the garbage collectors down Fifth lane all sat on her staircase everyday till they were served tea and snacks.

Her intelligence and knowledge of current affairs was also remarkable. Well into her 90’s though she might have been, she was up-to-date with all the global current affairs and had particularly strong opinions about politicians. And, although her childhood was rooted in post-colonial Sri Lanka, her willingness and ability to adapt her views and perceptions to the ensuing decades made her weekly articles to the Sunday Island eminently readable and relevant to generations across the board.

Another niece: Where do I begin to tell the story of how greatly our lives were enriched by Nanda Punchi Amma’s influence? NPA to us and Nan to the rest of the world through her weekly “People and Events” column in the Sunday Island, I could write volumes about her on a personal basis. But, since I do not possess her writing skills, let this humble note be a tribute to that wonderful lady.

I remember my first meeting with NPA; the pretty angel in a pastel-shaded Kandyan Saree, who came to my rescue when my father unleashed his wrath on me for complaints from my school. Those days brats like me were never given a hearing against what the teachers and matrons reported to the parents. NPA held me close to her, spoke so lovingly and asked for my side of the story. I felt so important and thanks to that small act of kindness, that little incident built up my self-confidence. That was NPA at her core: A person who made everyone feel important and wanted. The lives touched by her magic-wand of warmth and empathy continue to worship her.

Always dressed immaculately with matching accessories and a flower in her hair, NPA’s warm personality enhanced her natural beauty. During my clumsy young days, I tried to mimic her by wearing the beautiful sarees and slippers that she gifted to me; but my mother wisely said that however much I tried I would never reach that standard. In retrospect, it was true, for NPA was unique.

Her home was more than a home to all of us; it welcomed cousins, nephews, nieces, their families and in particular her favourite great grandniece. Her hospitality was boundless – every occasion was filled with good food, laughter and joy. Her voice on the phone would say “Aney darling please join me as so-and-so is coming over for a simple lunch/dinner”. Yet, her “simple meal” always turned out to be a lavish feast, and even a spontaneous visit to her home resulted in a long cozy chat and meal. Together we would all sit at her table chatting, laughing and reminiscing, until a nodding cousin reminded us that we had overstayed. She loved company, and she loved people. That was NPA.

Her life wasn’t always a bed of roses, but she strived to make a rose garden for all those who came close to her. Her kindness wasn’t just reserved for her nearest and dearest but also to those less fortunate; she took care of their medical and other needs, listened to their woes and made them happy.

Dearest Nanda Punchi Amma, are you finally tired of being there for us for such a long time? Do you need a rest away from all of us? If so – and with great reluctance- your wish is granted. We as beneficiaries of your loving kindness and caring ways will strive to carry your legacy forward. And although we may not succeed a hundred per cent, we will certainly try our best so that you will live forever in the hearts of generations to come.

: Time passes, the years ensue, but NPA has been a constant in my life.

My foremost recollection of NPA is her wedding in our living room at 20 Anniwatte. I still remember us as five little cousins mesmerized, gazing at her, stunned by her beauty for she was glowing purity at its best. We were all in new clothes and I was so proud of my new dress that NPA had sewn for me. There was so much food and music and we truly enjoyed ourselves, but later as NPA was leaving with Suriya Kudappachchi, we all cried because our parents were all crying and we did not know why.

Time passed. We visited NPA at Wimala Punchi Amma’s place where the fragrance of J&J baby powder was all over the garden and house. We were so thrilled and excited because NPA allowed us to touch the precious baby Dharshan. There was plenty of food and we had a good time but once again leaving NPA was hard, so we cried.

Time passed. NPA took me to Colombo to spend my school holidays with her. Going from Kandy to Dehiwala was magical, full of sweet memories of sea baths, walks on the beach and collecting seashells. My first Arithmetic teacher was NPA, and she ensured I memorized my multiplication tables from 1-12. While she was at work, she gave firm instructions to Podi Hami to ensure that I was safe and well-fed; when she returned from work we would take evening walks on the beach. Sundays were long sea-baths and we had such fun. I’d never seen a swim-suit clad lady in Kandy, so I was mesmerized by NPA in her beautiful swimsuit. Eventually though, the school holidays were over, and I cried to leave NPA one more time.

Time passed. It was my wedding day at Loku Akka’s home and NPA found time to secretly advise me. As I left and stepped into my future, she was all smiles for she was happy for me.

Time passed. I was back in Kandy and venturing out to Nagastanna Boyagama, NPA’s ancestral village. Loku Aiya was donating property to the Buddha Sasana. At the ceremonial arrival of NPA, beautifully dressed in white and adorned with a glistening white pearl necklace, she looked regal; together with the villagers we all went down on our knees to welcome her. NPA was very proud of our philanthropic duties and she gave us her full support, giving us the courage to go ahead with our plans.

Time passed. But whenever I could find time, I would take the train to Colombo to be with NPA. We would go to the Ladies’ College swimming pool and yoga classes. She would organize the “cousins get-together party”. Anything was good enough for NPA to express her happiness, generosity and kindness. She would, on her own, set the table so graciously and offer us a lavish meal. NPA was always game for lunch or dinner outings, high-teas at Mount Lavinia Hotel, and trips out of Colombo. She never forgot to invite her friends and she would always admire our clothes, although she was much better dressed than all of us. Most importantly however, NPA’s refined kindness, sincerity and lavish meals were not restricted to just her friends; she never ignored the domestic helpers and the municipality garbage collectors. I will never forget how NPA assisted a Bhikkhuni from Pallekele to receive medical treatment from Jayawardanapura hospital. With kindness, she offered transport, Dana and her home to rest.

Time passes. The years ensue. It has been so hard leaving you this one last time NPA…

: My Nanda Aththa…Matriarch of the family… Cross-generational agony aunt and role model with the beautiful nails. But, what is it that really made her so loved and cherished? Not just by her family and friends but also by the many people who came into her orbit? I think it was how she made people feel; a few cut anthuriums sent to her niece for no specific reason, breakfast buns for the pool guy just because he may like to have a treat on Sunday, a compliment, a word of kindness. Just little acts of kindness that made people feel seen, heard and loved. It is true, people are most remembered for how they make other people feel and Nanda Aththa will always be remembered for the love, warmth, and kindness she gave so freely.

Generations apart we may have been, but a rebel knows another rebel, and Nanda Aththa was certainly the OG rebel, who showed us all how to rebel with style and grace. I will never forget that time she organized a dhamma discussion at her apartment in 5th Lane. As a bored 12-year old, challenging authority was my favorite past-time. So I got into a heated argument with the priest, contending that life was in fact NOT suffering and that he probably just didn’t know how to have fun.

I remember seeing my grandmother mortified with shame at my behavior, but I saw Nanda aththa on the other side shaking in silent laughter, thoroughly enjoying the exchange, (she later quietly told me the same). This was all the endorsement I needed to know that it is always okay to question conventional wisdom and form your own thoughts and ideas. She lived her life this way; on her own terms and not according to accepted conventions. Whether it was traipsing around the country going on trips with her girl gang, faithfully going for her Sunday morning swims at 92 or writing her beloved column even with failing health, she taught us to rebel quietly and gracefully,

how to live life to the fullest and chart your own course. She was one of the most inspirational women I have ever met. Her kindness, grace, exceptional style and fun loving nature will forever be missed, but we are all so thankful that we got to have her for so long and touch so many lives along the way.

Nanda Muththa is a really special person to me. Fond memories of going to her cozy house for visits and chats, going to the Ladies’ College pool and seeing her swimming there always comes to my mind. She once told me something I will never forget. When we visited her on a short trip back from Indonesia, when my Amma told her that I look just like my chuti punchi, she looked straight at me and said with a small smile, “you don’t look like anyone but yourself.” I will always treasure that memory,  because in those few words she taught me that I should always be myself.

As I sit here thousands of miles away from Sri Lanka, compiling and ‘editing’ these varied memories and thoughts from my mother, aunts, sisters and niece, a few common themes glimmer through. Your grace and beauty (even at the ripe old age of 93) awed us, your wisdom guided us, and your exemplary kindness and generosity of spirit always made us feel loved, seen and heard. The day you passed, I lit a small “mati pahana’’ for you Nanda Aththa, and as I watched that flame sparkle and shine, I thought of how that flame was a metaphor for your life. The flame, shone brightly at moments, flickered at some others but for the most part shone steadily. And eventually, the flame faded away leaving behind just the simple mati pahana. Watching that pahana, I am reminded of a fundamental Buddhist truth: Nothing in life is permanent, and even the brightest flame will eventually fade away. But, the conduit for the flame, the pahana remains behind, and in that I know, that although your physical presence is no more, your core of kindness and generosity will remain with us always, reminding us that kindness and compassion remain the most precious of human qualities.

The Sirisena – Ranil conflict and events leading to MR’s return as PM

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.