‘Samata Kotasak, Samata Ekakayak’ forums in A’pura & Jaffna end on high note

The Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC) and the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) have taken their ‘A Share for Everyone, A Unit for Everyone’ (Samata Kotasak, Samata Ekakayak) initiative to Anuradhapura and Jaffna through investor forums last week, as part of an ongoing island wide effort to broaden investor participation.

The forums were held on 10 September at the Golden Mango in Anuradhapura, and on 12 September at the Tilko Jaffna City Hotel. The forums attracted over 600 participants across both locations.

The “A Share for Everyone, A Unit for Everyone” concept aims to promote a shared commitment to creating wealth and value within a fair, efficient, orderly, and transparent capital market by ensuring broad and accessible participation for all.

As part of this initiative, the SEC and CSE will continue to host investor forums across the country to strengthen investor education and awareness while promoting broader participation in the capital market beyond the Western Province. By leveraging the CSE’s nationwide reach and the growing interest in equity investments, the programme will provide investors with greater access to Sri Lanka’s capital market through stockbroking firms and unit trust management companies.

“Traditionally, Sri Lankan investors have favoured conventional investment avenues, but it has yielded comparatively fewer returns than the capital market,” remarked Executive Vice President – Marketing, CSE,  Niroshan Wijesundera, speaking on the Unit Trust and Stockbrokering firm outreach objectives of the broad-basing initiative.

Speaking on the favourable investment climate, he noted that the Sri Lankan capital market is at a relatively low Price-to-Earnings (P/E) ratio of 11.03x in a global context.

“As covered in the presentations at the forums, the Sri Lankan capital market has demonstrated comparative resilience in the face of global market corrections, such as the Middle Eastern crisis. Sri Lanka has withstood bigger shocks, such as past crises, the war, Covid, the economic downturn, and the fuel crisis. The market has, despite all this, has provided better returns compared to traditional investment avenues over the course of the last four to five years.”

Over the past six years the All-Share Price Index (ASPI) has increased from 5,320 points in August 2020 to 21,315 points by the end of August 2026, representing a growth of 300 percent and a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of around 26 percent.

The Investor Forums began with presentations by representatives of leading stockbroking firms. Speakers, including A. Visaahan, Vice President - Research at Asha Securities (Pvt) Ltd, and Dilina Kulatunga, Head of Research at Capital Trust Securities (Pvt) Ltd, provided an introductory presentation on the capital market and a comprehensive overview of the current market outlook for prospective investors in Jaffna and Anuradhapura, respectively.

Participants also had the opportunity to hear directly from unit trust management companies about investing in equity funds and the benefits they offer. These insights were provided through presentations by Kumudu Kekirideniya, Manager - Business Development at Softlogic Asset Management (Pvt) Ltd, and Thillainadarajah Luxchan, Senior Manager at NDB Wealth (Pvt) Ltd, who delivered their presentations in Anuradhapura and Jaffna.

Both forums concluded with a panel discussion and Q&A session. During the investor forums, prospective investors had the opportunity to meet representatives from stockbroking firms and unit trust management companies to open investment accounts.