The HALO Trust appoints Rishini Weeraratne as Ambassador for Sri Lanka

The HALO Trust, the world’s largest humanitarian landmine clearance organisation, has appointed Rishini Weeraratne as its Ambassador for Sri Lanka.

Rishini currently serves as Editor, The Sun (Daily Mirror), Editor, HI!! Online, and Head of Social Media at Wijeya Newspapers Ltd. In her new role, she will support HALO’s global mission by raising awareness of mine action, strengthening advocacy efforts, and championing initiatives to protect communities impacted by landmines and unexploded ordnance, particularly in Sri Lanka. She will also play a key role in HALO’s international engagement and communications initiatives.

HALO began working in Afghanistan in 1988. Today HALO operates in more than 30 countries and territories across Africa, Asia, Europe and Caucasus, Latin America, and the Middle East. Its teams work daily to clear landmines, deliver risk education and restore land for agriculture, homes and infrastructure. HALO gained international recognition after Diana, Princess of Wales, visited its work in Angola in 1997 which helped accelerate support for the Mine Ban Treaty. Sri Lanka is one of HALO’s longest standing programmes. HALO has been operational in the island since 2002 and has cleared more than 300,000 mines and over one million explosive remnants of war, enabling thousands of families to return home safely. HALO is the second largest employer in the Northern Province, and its workforce is 99 percent locally recruited. Women make up 42 percent of the demining teams, reflecting HALO’s commitment to local empowerment and employment in post conflict communities.

The HALO Trust Ambassador for Sri Lanka Rishini Weeraratne said:  “It is a privilege to support The HALO Trust’s mission. Although Sri Lanka is my home country and close to my heart, I am also committed to advocating for HALO’s work around the world. Millions of people live with the daily risk of landmines and unexploded ordnance. By raising awareness and amplifying the voices of affected communities, I hope to contribute to a safer future for families everywhere.”

The HALO Trust CEO James Cowan said:  “We are honoured to welcome Ambassador Rishini Weeraratne as The HALO Trust’s Ambassador for Sri Lanka. Her deep understanding of Sri Lanka’s history, her commitment to peace and development, and her respected international voice will be invaluable as HALO continues its work to make communities safe from the threat of landmines and explosive remnants of war. We look forward to working closely with Ambassador Weeraratne to advance our mission and support a safer future for all Sri Lankans.”