Amana Bank crowned ‘Best Bank in Sri Lanka’ for second consecutive year

AVP Business Proposition & Regional Head (Central Region), Azam Ameer, presenting the award to Managing Director/CEO Mohamed Azmeer, in the presence of the MANCOM members

Amana Bank was once again recognized as the Best Bank in Sri Lanka at the Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC) Emerging Asia Banking Awards 2026 adjudicated by PwC, marking the second consecutive year the Bank has secured the coveted title competing against leading banks in the country.

Adding to this achievement, Amana Bank also received the award for Best Performance on Risk Management, recognizing the Bank’s continued focus on prudent risk management practices and responsible growth.

Having been named Best Bank in Sri Lanka at the 2025 edition of the awards, the Bank’s success for a second consecutive year reflects its consistent performance and progress, as well as the strength of its non-interest-based developmentfocused people friendly banking model.

Organised by the Indian Chamber of Commerce with PwC serving as the process reviewers, the Emerging Asia Banking Awards recognize excellence in the banking sector across the BIMSTEC region, comprising Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Thailand.

The 2026 awards were presented alongside the 4th ICC Emerging Asia Banking Conclave held recently at Le Meridien Hotel in New Delhi. The Deputy Governor - Central Bank of Sri Lanka K. G .P. Sirikumara graced the occasion as the Guest of Honour.

Commenting on the recognition, Amana Bank Managing Director/CEO Mohamed Azmeer said, “We are extremely pleased to be recognized as the Best Bank in Sri Lanka for the second consecutive year, endorsing the progress we continue to make as a Bank and the confidence placed in us by our customers and stakeholders. The recognition for Best Performance on Risk Management is equally significant as it underscores the strength of Amana Bank’s asset-backed unique banking model, which inherently promotes financial discipline, prudent financial practices, and risk-sharing. Our success in risk management is built on a foundation of robust underwriting practices, a comprehensive risk management framework, and proactive customer engagement. I would like to thank our entire team for their commitment and our customers for continuing to place their trust in Amana Bank.”

Amana Bank was represented at the 4th ICC Emerging Asia Banking Conclave and Awards by Assistant Vice President - Business Proposition & Regional Head (Central Region), Azam Ameer.