StrEdge establishes global headquarters in Dubai

StrEdge, a fast-growing management consulting firm founded in Sri Lanka, has announced the setting up of its global headquarters in Dubai, marking a key milestone in its journey from a regional advisory firm to a globally positioned consultancy.

The Dubai entity will lead the firm’s expansion strategy across UAE, GCC, Middle East, Africa, and Europe, while the Sri Lankan company will continue its focus on Asia, and be the strategic delivery partner, providing operational, analytical, and technical expertise that supports the firm’s international growth.

“This expansion marks an important inflection point for us,” says Chester Cruse, Director & CEO of StrEdge Consulting Middle East. Cruse, a former banker with over 25 years of experience across many markets, having held C-suite leadership roles, brings expertise in Transformation, Project Management, Governance, Risk, M&A, Operations and Shared Services.

StrEdge Middle East is a management consulting firm that partners with financial institutions to achieve purposeful transformation. Headquartered in Dubai, with an operations, delivery and innovation hub in Sri Lanka, the firm operates across the UAE, GCC, Middle East, Africa, and Europe. It focuses on helping banks, insurance companies, and financial institutions transform with purpose — combining strategy, culture, process, and technology to achieve sustainable outcomes.

Client offerings of StrEdge Middle East are built around six key service pillars of Transformation and Growth, People Empowerment, Operation Optimisation, Acceleration of technology, Strengthening financials and Leading responsibility.

“Our philosophy is simple — transformation must connect people, process, technology and purpose. We call this orchestrating value because it’s about creating synergy across every part of a financial institution to drive long-term value,” Cruse notes.

Ceylon Chamber affirms support for national recovery efforts following Cyclone Ditwah

Sierra Cables delivers strong six-month performance for period ended 30th September 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.