Cabinet reshuffle no link to ongoing container probe – Cabinet Spokesman

Dismisses claim that Minister Bimal Rathnayake's portfolio has link to ongoing controversial container probe

Stresses Cabinet reshuffle was made to increase efficacy of Govt.'s 2025 Budget

Emphasises Govt.  committed to prevent irregularities when clearing containers at Customs

Refuting the claim that there is a link to the recent Cabinet reshuffle to ongoing investigations into the controversial release of 323 containers by the Sri Lanka Customs early this year, the Government said that it was done to improve the efficiency of Government’s plans and forthcoming Budget plans.

“The decision to revise ministerial portfolios was taken after reviewing the scope and workload of several ministries,” Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa said.

Responding to a question on changing Minister Bimal Rathnayake's portfolio, he dismissed the claim and said that the investigations into the container release including alleged 14 similar incidents happened in the past, were proceeding with no interference.

Addressing the post-Cabinet press briefing, Dr. Jayatissa said that some ministries had become too broad, making it difficult to manage their key functions efficiently, therefore, certain portfolios with wider scopes were narrowed and reorganised to ensure more focused and effective administration.

“President Anura Kumara Disanayake, as the Minister of Finance, had directed to have a full investigation into alleged irregularities occurred during releasing of containers. This move was taken to maintain transparency and accountability,” he said referring to the ongoing probe into alleged container release.

According to the Cabinet Spokesman, the President had made it clear that irregularities were reported when following steps to address congestion and expedite container clearance.

“The Government wants to prevent such occurrences. A committee was appointed to look into this matter and also a separate internal investigation is now being carried out to determine where corruption took place. We also want to find out whether there is a recurring pattern of such irregularities during periods of heavy port congestion, especially in March and December, when a higher number of containers are released, Dr. Jayatissa said adding that investigations have revealed that similar incidents have occurred on 14 previous occasions.

Meanwhile, further explaining the Government’s move to have a Cabinet reshuffle, he said for a year, the Government had been managing those ministries and now had a clear understanding of their functions to prepare its own Budget to implement the policies and strategies accordingly.

“For example, my Ministry, the Health Ministry, also oversees the indigenous medicine sector. Since it has a wider scope a deputy minister has been appointed to ensure efficiency of the Media Ministry,” he said.

Dr. Jayatissa emphasised that the reshuffle was done especially to implement the Government’s 2025 budget proposals to full scale.

“Although the Budget was passed on 21 March, its execution was delayed until the Local Government elections were concluded in early May. Then the Government commenced implementing our new budgetary framework,” he explained.

Dr. Jayatissa added that the Government had gained a clearer understanding of each ministry’s operational priorities and challenges to reorganise its development goals and national priorities.

“Therefore, the Cabinet reshuffle is part of a broader strategy to ensure transparency, efficiency, and accountability in the public sector, and to deliver results in line with the policies outlined in the 2025 budget,” he stressed.