SAIGE LANKA launches SAIGE electric motorcycle showroom in Kadawatha

Sri Lanka’s first showroom for high-quality electric motorcycles manufactured by SAIGE Electric Vehicle Technology Co., Ltd was opened last week in Kadawatha.

Managing Director of SAIGE LANKA (PVT) LTD, Pradeep Nanayakkara, the sole importer and distributor in Sri Lanka of SAIGE E bikes, said that with escalating fuel costs, high-quality motorcycles powered by alternative energy sources will help reduce transport costs and provide an economical, reliable, and trouble free mobility solution for Sri Lankans.

He said SAIGE E bikes are priced among the lowest in the market while maintaining very high quality, as they are manufactured by China-based SAIGE Electric, a company with over 50 years of industry experience in electric mobility and automotive engineering.

“We offer a comprehensive guarantee and after sales service, and each bike comes with several novel features, including energy efficient performance, and can travel around 120 km on a single four charge under standard riding conditions. We also offer 5-year warranty for the battery.”

He added that the initiative contributes to Sri Lanka’s green energy and sustainable transport goals, and the company hopes to introduce more electric mobility products from the manufacturer in the near future.

He also disclosed plans to establish a charging station at the head office in the near future to support customers and improve convenience.

“We will also make this product available across the country through our newly appointed dealer network so that the benefits of affordable electric mobility can reach rural and semi urban areas as well,” he said.

Cassie Yang and Shirley Dou, representing the marketing team of SAIGE Electric Vehicle Technology Co., Ltd, said the company has launched products across multiple global markets including Europe, and that this marks the first introduction of its electric bike series to Sri Lanka.

Deputy Minister of Rural Development, Social Security and Community Empowerment Wasantha Piyathissa was the Chief Gust while parliamentarians, islandwide dealers, customers, and well-wishers also participated.

John Keells Foundation spearheads training on gender-sensitive media content development

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.