Piprahwa Relics from India welcomed in Europe’s only Buddhist Republic

Elista, Republic of Kalmykia, Russia -In a moment charged with history and devotion, the sacred Piprahwa Relics of the Buddha — bone fragments discovered in 1898 at Piprahwa — were displayed in Elista, the capital of the Republic of Kalmykia, for their first-ever public exposition in Russia. The week-long event, held from October 11–18.

In a Facebook post, India’s Ministry of Culture, witnessed an “unprecedented turnout” to venerate the Relics.

The Relics, venerated as among the remains of the Buddha, were transported from the National Museum of India under the supervision of a high-level delegation led by Deputy Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh., India, Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya, accompanied by Vinay Kumar, India’s Ambassador to Russia, and senior monks of the International Buddhist Confederation (IBC).

The holy relics were received at Elista Airport by Batu Sergeyevich Khasikov, Head of the Republic of Kalmykia, together with the Shajin Lama of the Kalmyk people, Geshe Tenzin Choidak, Ambassador Vinay Kumar, and senior clergy of the Geden Sheddup Choikorling Monastery — the “Golden Abode of Shakyamuni Buddha.”

The Relics were solemnly enshrined at the Geden Sheddup Choikorling Monastery.

According to the IBC Facebook post: “A wave of devotion swept through Elista as footfall of 30,000 devotees was recorded for the first three days of the Holy Relics exposition, as per the official data from the Government of Kalmykia. The sacred presence of the Holy Relics continues to draw crowds in reverence.”

Exhibitions inaugurated during the forum included “The Art of Stillness – Buddhist Art from the National Collection” and “The Sacred Legacy of the Shakyas: Excavation and Exposition of Buddha’s Relics .

Cultural events complemented the exposition: a concert at the Kalmyk State Philharmonic and a community dialogue at the Central Khurul celebrated Kalmykia’s Buddhist revival.

Visitors also got to experience ‘‘Bodhicitta’- Treasures of Buddhist Art from the National Museum, New Delhi and the National Mission for Manuscripts in India, which offered a profound engagement with over two millennia of India’s rich Buddhist heritage.

“By special flight, the relics arrived in the Elista airport, where they were received by the head of the republic Batu Khasikov and many believers.” — Mir24, 11 Oct. 2025

“For the week from October 11 to October 18, Elista will become a center of spiritual development of world significance.” — TASS, 11 Oct. 2025

“The Indian delegation brought to the Kalmyk capital relics of the historical founder of Buddhism — the Kapilavastu relics, among the most venerated holy relics.” — RIA Novosti, 11 Oct. 2025

“For Elista, as one of the spiritual centers of Russia, the reception of such holy relics is an important event for the development of interreligious and intercultural dialogue between India and Russia.” — Vz.ru, 11 Oct. 2025

“As is known, our people have a greatest cultural heritage — the epic Jangar, in which is celebrated the strength of spirit and virtue of our ancestors.” — Elista.Bezformata.com

“…the Kapilavastu relics brought to Elista are vessels containing the Buddha’s ashes [or bone fragments].” — Fontanka.ru, 11 Oct. 2025

The Republic of Kalmykia, bordering the Caspian Sea, is home to the largest Buddhist community in Europe. Descended from the Oirat Mongols, the Kalmyks follow the Gelug tradition of Tibetan Buddhism.

From Piprahwa to Elista—across 5,000 km and 2,500 years of history — the sacred fragments of the Buddha found a temporary home in Europe’s only Buddhist republic, uniting faith, history, and diplomacy in a single moment of stillness.

Photos and information, courtesy Facebook posts from: International Buddhist Confederation (IBC) and India’s Ministry of Culture.

Beyond the Wheel: The Tuktuk as a Tool for Social Empowerment and Passive Income

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.