Sri Lanka highlights trade, investment and tourism opportunities in Brussels

The Sri Lanka Embassy, ‘Diplomatic World’ and ‘Travel Tomorrow Magazine’ in Belgium and the Department of Commerce of Sri Lanka jointly organised a successful business forum; “Business & Tourism Opportunities in Sri Lanka” on 13 October 2025 at the Press Club Europe in Brussels. More than 60 participants including the officials from the EU institutions, Belgian authorities, private sector companies, investors, travel industry representatives, think-tanks and media professionals had the opportunity to explore Sri Lanka’s growing potential as an emerging business hub as well as a promising tourist destination in South Asia.

The forum opened with welcome remarks by the Ambassador Chandana Weerasena, followed by an online keynote speech by Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs & Foreign Employment, Arun Hemachandra from Sri Lanka. Both speakers underlined the nation’s resilience and renewed focus on sustainable economic development, attracting foreign investment, and fostering international partnerships, emphasising Sri Lanka is the best country to trade, invest and one of the safest countries to visit. The Deputy Minister highlighted the importance of working together for deeper and sustainable economic relations at a time international politics, economics, social and security aspects are being challenged.

Minister Commercial of the Embassy, Thavishya Mullegamgoda presented trade and investment opportunities in emerging sectors in Sri Lanka highlighting potential areas for mutual collaborations between Sri Lanka and Belgium. She presented a number of sectors for Belgians and Sri Lankans to find business opportunities such as pharmaceuticals, food and beverages, agriculture, ICT, renewable energy, logistics, tourism and leisure, innovation and technology etc. Country’s strategic location, vibrant business environment, sustainable manufacturing practices and market access opportunities were also highlighted.

One of the highlights of the event was sharing business experiences by Belgian entrepreneurs in Sri Lanka. Raketman Ltd., in Sri Lanka CEO Emmanuel Blomme, who also the former UTP Sri Lanka (VCF Cigars Belgium) General Manager and the Vets Alphi Diamonds Belgium & Lydie’s Diamonds in Sri Lanka CEO Joachim Vets shared their business experiences in Sri Lanka. Their real-world examples and experiences in Sri Lanka as foreign entrepreneurs, was attracted by many in the forum.

Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau Managing Director Sampath Nishshanka joined the forum virtually and presented Sri Lanka’s authentic, diverse and compact tourism offerings. Travel Tomorrow magazine Editor-in-Chief António Buscardini, and Aitken Spence Travels Benelux Representative Johan Six, contributed to the panel discussion on travel and tourism opportunities in Sri Lanka. The discussion explored the country’s unique blend of nature, heritage, and hospitality, with emphasis on responsible tourism and experiential travel.

Adding a vibrant cultural and economic dimension to the event, a display of Sri Lanka’s prominent export items to the European market including Ceylon tea, spices, coconut products, lifestyle products were displayed at the venue. Product and tourism brochures and promotional materials highlighting the island’s scenic beauty, cultural heritage, and adventure experiences were also on display for attendees to explore.

Following the formal program, guests enjoyed a reception featuring authentic Sri Lankan snacks and Ceylon tea, providing an opportunity for informal networking and cultural exchange. The

Embassy expressed gratitude to all partners and participants for contributing to a successful evening of dialogue and collaboration.