Sybil Wettasinghe’s magic of storytelling continues

Book Launch: The Magic Silver Tree and Sybil Wettasinghe’s latest books, The Magic Silver Tree and Puduma Ridi Gaha, posthumously published by Adith Publishers, will be launched on the 24 November 2025, at 3.30pm at the Lionel Wendt Art Centre, Colombo. Exhibition of the original artwork from the books will continue on the 25th November, from 9.30am to 7.30pm.

and Puduma Ridi Gaha, based on a mythical folk story, continues Sybil Wettasinghe’s legacy of enchanting narratives through words and pictures, weaving together her timeless art of storytelling with endearingly beautiful and lively illustrations. First published in Japan in 2017, the artwork of The Magic Silver Tree has been recognized as one the finest illustrations done by Sybil Wettasinghe.

In her career spanning over 70 years, Sybil Wettasinghe wrote and illustrated over 400 books, and won eight state literary awards and several international awards, including the prestigious Nikkei Award from Japan in 2012. Her iconic book Kuda Hora has been translated into eight languages. The Magic Silver Tree is the last of her books to be published in Japan during her lifetime, with seven other books preceding this including favourite titles such as Hoity the Fox, Runaway Beard, Visitors to the Cat Country, Dancing in the Gourd, and the translation of her autobiography, The Child in Me.

The launch of The Magic Silver Tree and Puduma Ridi Gaha and the exhibition, celebrating Sybil’s unique style of storytelling and illustrations, are open to the public from 24th to 25th November, 2025.

Sybil Wettasinghe (October 31, 1928 – June 30, 2020) was a pioneering figure in Sri Lankan children’s literature, whose work continues to inspire generations.

Her career as an illustrator began with teenager Sybil joining Lankadeepa as an artist, to illustrate a cartoon strip based on folk poems. Her unique and self-developed style of lively illustrations soon caught the attention of the public and brought her recognition a young age.

Her career as a writer began at Lake House Newspapers, through the encouragement of Dharmapala Wettasinghe, then Chief Subeditor of Janatha newspaper, who later became her husband. When the regular story writer was absent one day, he invited Sybil to contribute a story—Kuda Hora (The Umbrella Thief), her first story became an instant favorite among young readers and marked the beginning of a remarkable career in storytelling and illustration.

Kuda Hora, originally illustrated in black and white, was published in 1956 as a Navamaga supplementary reader and has remained in continuous publication for over 65 years. In 1983, Sybil re-illustrated the book in color and entered it into Japan’s prestigious Noma Concours Picture Book Illustrations Competition, where she won third place. This recognition led to  Kuda Hora being translated and published in Japan, and later in Korea, China, Sweden, and Denmark.

In total, Sybil Wettasinghe authored and illustrated over 400 children’s books, in addition to illustrating hundreds more for other authors. Eight of her books were published in Japan, the last being Magic Silver Tree. She wrote in both Sinhala and English, with many of her work being translated into Tamil.

Sybil passed away peacefully on June 30, 2020, leaving behind an enduring literary and artistic legacy.

Magic Silver Tree is inspired by a Sri Lankan mythical folktale in which three princes embark on an adventure to fulfill their father’s dream. The story is beautifully brought to life through Sybil Wettasinghe’s signature illustrations—vibrant, detailed, and full of movement. The mythical tale celebrates courage, perseverance, and the beauty of pursuing one’s destiny despite challenges.

Sybil’s youngest son, Vinod Wettasinghe, worked meticulously on the layout and design to ensure that the quality of his mother’s artistry was preserved. After months of dedicated effort, he published the book through his family company, Adith Publishers (Pvt) Ltd., the principal publisher of Sybil’s works.

The Magic Silver Tree is a hardcover edition with silver-embossed detailing, making it a treasured collector’s item or a meaningful gift for readers and art lovers alike.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.