My faux pas speaking French

The most striking aspect about UN employees, particularly those of European background, was their fluency in multiple languages. My superior in the UN Iraq Programme was a Swiss national from near Zurich and from the German speaking area of Switzerland. In addition to his native language of German, he could converse fluently in English, French, Italian and Spanish.

On average, a European bureaucrat could speak a minimum of three languages. I met a Swede in 2018 who was fluent in six languages. The Scandinavian countries educational system makes it mandatory for students to speak at least three languages before they graduate Primary School, with English and the mother tongue being mandatory.

The British system under which we were educated in the 1950s and 1960s had many drawbacks. One was the inadequacy of developing linguistic skills. Even English, which was an international language, was downgraded in schools after 1956. By right, Sri Lankans should be fluent is all three languages spoken in the island, with English providing anyone access to the world. Sinhala and Tamil both should have been taught to us. And we would have been tri-lingual and as a Sinhalese , I would have been fluent in the oldest language of the world – Tamil – by the time I was 10-years old.

The British, who did not pay much heed to linguistic skills, found to their horror the need to be proficient in other languages after the “Jewel in their Crown”, India, won independence in 1947 after a hard-fought struggle.

I had studied French, prior to my 2001 appointment with the UN. However, I was put in my place, language-wise, within a week of starting work. On coming to work on two successive days, I greeted a fellow employee, saying. “Morning, Vincent”. There was no response from Vincent other than a glare. On the third day Vincent approached me and said, quite curtly, “I am not Vincent; in French, I am Vansans!” Thus, I learned the hard way the nuances of French pronunciation. Saint, for instance, is pronounced, “San” and what in English is “Saint Dennis” is pronounced in French as “San Denee”.

I was tested in my skills in spoken French again in late 2003. During the summer, the World Athletics Championship took place at Stade de France in St Denis. After the event, the games village apartments were up for rent. I secured one of them for a short period.

The roads of the village were named after famous athletes. The following incident took place whilst going in search of an apartment to rent: I met a passer-by after alighting from the Metro at St Dennis and, in my stuttering French, inquired;,”Excusez-moi, Monsieur, où est la rue Jesse Owens s’il vous plaît. Et pouvez-vous me donner des indications?” which roughly translates to: “Excuse me please Sir, where is Jesse Owens Street please? And can you direct me?”

The man looked non plussed and after repeating my question, he said: “S’il vous plaît écrivez-le pour moi”, meaning, “Please write down for me.” So, I wrote down in French. And he laughed. “Ce n’est pas rue Jesse Owens, c’est rue Jessowens” “It is not Jesse Owens, it is pronounced Jessowens”, he explained in English.

“When a word ends or begin with a vowel, it is pronounced in French by joining together both adjacent words together and pronounced as a single word”. Thus “Jesse Owens” is “Jessowens”. So, when one says, “Je Vous Aime Beacoup” (I love you very much) it is pronounced as one word. “Jevaisaimebeacoup”. A famous Nat King Cole song of the ‘50s, the first line of which is “Darling Jevaisembeacoup, means I love you, honestly I do”

French is indeed a very complicated language to pronounce but an easy one to write, as I was to learn through many mistakes. One of my colleagues at my current workplace in 2024 in Perth is from Mauritius. He speaks both languages, French and English fluently. And I practice my basic French with him. It is not only pronunciation that puts one in trouble. Using words that have different connotations in dissimilar cultures can also cause problems, as I was to find out.

However, in sharp contrast, there was a female Kurdish employee who was an exemplary worker with commendable output. Her strengths were in planning and financial management. Towards the end of my tenure, I praised her, in an email, for doing “Yeoman Service”. However, she was agitated with this praise. It had the opposite effect on her. Fortunately for me, the director of the division, who was a Moroccan, understood what had happened and came to my rescue. In Arabic, which the Kurdish employee was familiar with, yeoman meant the “Donkey’s Keeper”.

The Director, with the aid of an “English to French Dictionary” was able to convince the employee that I really meant a compliment. Fortunately, in the French dictionary “Yeoman Service” was defined as “Exlempaire Traville”. The latter meant ‘exemplary work”, as it was in English.

Phew! An impasse and a tricky situation were sorted. It was my “Faux Pas” and a good lesson learned in the need for checking translations to prevent cultural misunderstandings. Looking back on this incident, I realized where the original misunderstanding was. Even the original English meaning, according to the etymology of the word, was “an attendant in a noble household”. In Arabic the word may have taken a pejorative meaning, that of “a donkey’s keeper”. It was only later, even in English, that yeomen’s service came to mean, “good, efficient service”.

The Kurdish lady was a happy employee after it was explained to her and continued to be an efficient and dream employee. She gave me a present on my departure from Iraq in March, just before the ‘impending US led invasion”. Unwrapping the parcel brought a smile to my face. It was an English to Arabic Dictionary.

(Excerpted from an anthology of memoirs by Nihal Kodituwakku) ✍️

My experience in turning around the Merchant Bank of Sri Lanka (MBSL)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.