Home Lands breaks ground on Canterbury Crest Resort Apartments

Final phase construction commences of the largest residential development project in Sri Lanka

Home Lands has officially begun development of Canterbury Crest Resort Apartments following the ceremonial groundbreaking and foundation stone laying.

This occasion marks the launch of one of four brand-new resort apartment developments by Home Lands in Greater Colombo. Canterbury Crest is the last stage of development at Canterbury Golf City - Piliyandala Kahaththuduwa, the largest residential development project in Sri Lanka comprising 1,200 units already. Due to the strong market demand generated by Canterbury Golf City, Home Lands made the strategic decision to introduce this final phase of resort apartments complementing Sri Lanka’s largest residential development.

The ceremony, held on 19 March, was graced by Home Lands Group Chairman Nalin Herath, together with the management.

Canterbury Golf City is Sri Lanka’s first Victorian-style golf resort apartments and residencies complex, a defining milestone in Home Lands’ journey. With the addition of Canterbury Crest, Home Lands continues to meet the rising demand for residential living inside this prestigious development, building on the success of other projects within Canterbury Golf City such as Canterbury Golf Resort Apartments, Canterbury Garden Resort Apartments, Canterbury Lexus, Canterbury Golf Villas and Canterbury Golf Residencies.  The project is symbolic of Home Lands’ ability to combine scale, design excellence, and lifestyle innovation, establishing a benchmark that became a blueprint for the company’s subsequent developments.

The development showcases modern Victorian-style architecture comprising 96 apartments, each unit features a private balcony with impressive views, enhancing everyday living. Rising five floors, each tower is thoughtfully designed to offer comfort, convenience, and refined living. Offering a selection of two- and three-bedroom apartments, Canterbury Crest is complemented by a range of exclusive resident amenities, including a swimming pool, dedicated pickleball court, and a fully equipped outdoor gym. Strategically located just 20 minutes from Colombo and minutes from the Southern Expressway, the development ensures seamless connectivity within a rapidly growing corridor.

Commenting on the launch, Herath said: “Home Lands has once again responded to the strong demand for resort-style living within Canterbury Golf City, the first of its kind in Sri Lanka. Since its inception, Canterbury Golf City has proven to be a highly sought-after development for both homeowners and investors. With Canterbury Crest, we are proud to deliver the final phase of this development, seamlessly blending prestige with comfortable living.”

Home Lands has been shaping the nation’s real estate landscape with a legacy built on trust, innovation, and excellence. Home Lands is the pioneer of resort-style residential developments in Sri Lanka and continues to redefine modern living, setting new benchmarks in quality, design, and lifestyle. As a fully integrated group of 14 companies, including its own construction arm, Heyraa Construction, holding the highest CS2 grading from CIDA, Home Lands delivers end-to-end solutions across real estate, construction, property management, and lifestyle creation, ensuring uncompromised quality, innovation, and customer satisfaction.

With a growing global presence and offices in Australia, Dubai, and London, Home Lands serves both local and international clients, delivering landmark residential projects across the country.

Home Lands has earned multiple accolades, including the Best Developer – Sri Lanka award at the PropertyGuru Asia Property Awards for three consecutive years, and in 2025 was honoured with Superbrands status, becoming the only real estate Superbrand in Sri Lanka.

With over 3,500 units delivered alongside 500 more units ready to deliver within the next 6 months and over 2,200 units under construction, Home Lands continues to redefine lifestyles through trust, innovation and excellence.