Catholics, Black Magic, and Community

My mother was from Paiyagala, a coastal fishing village 30 miles from Colombo and five miles from Kalutara. The old Colombo-Galle Road runs through the village, linking it with Kalutara, Beruwela, and beyond.Paiyagala is known for its beaches, seine net fishing, coconut toddy tapping, and seasonal jaadi (cured fish). The villagers are staunch Catholics who also believe in black magic, voodoo, and sorcery in their day-to-day life. They think an evil eye, evil tongue, and evil mind can harm others. My mother remembered how an Irish priest tried to convince his parishioners that it was a sin to believe in non-Catholic rituals. Yet he condoned such practices in the parish because parishioners considered them part of their local culture.

They believed black magic, voodoo, and sorcery could bring quick and palpable results without revealing the initiation of such actions. Sudden death in a family,

grave illness of a child, loss of employment, or a spouse eloping with a lover were attributed to black magic and sorcery. Vedaralas (local physicians) were supposed to determine whether an illness resulted from black magic, sorcery, or an imbalance in body elements, and thereafter recommend an appropriate treatment.

My maternal grandfather was a carpenter. He was a robust, tall, handsome man with long hair and fair complexion and had a bit of a hunch. He wore a white sarong and a white cotton jacket for formal events such as Sunday mass or a wedding. He wore a coloured sarong, a cloth belt, and an undershirt at his carpentry shed. He worked at a tea estate far away from Paiyagala and visited his home once a month. He spoke English and was interested in reading English newspapers.

He died suddenly when he was 32 years old. One day, he walked along the railway track from Paiyagala to Beruwala to visit his uncle, who was a businessman. His uncle was a rich man and was known in the Beruwala bazaar as  ‘pawun mudalali’ (a merchant with lots of sterling pounds). He had once, allegedly in an argument with a fellow businessman, boasted that he had enough sterling pounds to cover his large compound from one end to the other.

My grandfather had lunch at his uncle’s place and left for Paiyagala. A few hours later a fisherman found his body under a railway bridge, which was about two miles from his home. His relatives concluded that a demon hit him from behind after following him from his uncle’s house. The smell of pork curry he had eaten for lunch attracted the demon, it was said.

The Umbe (short, unprotected railway bridge) where his body was found was reputed to be a demon-haunted ground. Rrelatives and others had seen a large black mark on his neck, which they suspected to be the palm imprint of the demon who attacked him. The froth foaming from his mouth confirmed that he had seen a demon, it was said. Demons are fond of human flesh and blood, but in my grandfather’s case, allegedly the demon could not drink blood from his body because someone had seen the dead body and approached it before this happened.

At the funeral, the Italian parish priest, in his eulogy, said that he, too, identified several clues that confirmed that a demon had killed my grandfather. One was the blackened neck and the other was the froth. He talked at length at the funeral about how evil spirits and demons harm the innocent, especially young people. He warned those alive to be more religious to fend off evil spirits. Fifty years later, Nihal, my elder brother, was the parish priest at Paiyagala. He inquired from several older people about our grandfather’s death. The majority said that a demon killed him. But a few told Nihal that our grandfather had committed suicide. He had large debts that he could not repay with his meagre income. He was also unhappy about his young wife, being harassed by a young neighbour. At that time, she was pregnant with their second child.

According to Nihal’s sources, a young man wanted to possess my grandmother, and for this, he killed my grandfather by resorting to black magic. He had allegedly buried a powerful charm in front of my grandfather’s house. Anyone who walked over it would have the misfortune of becoming depressed and committing suicide. My grandfather did not know about the charm buried in his garden and, unfortunately, walked over it, becoming its victim according to that story.

First, he gave up working. He drank toddy, which he got free from tappers in the mornings and in the late afternoons. On the day he died, he visited his uncle in Beruwela to beg for a loan to pay his debtors. He was unsuccessful. A plausible explanation of his sudden death is that he was overwhelmed by his misfortunes and depression and committed suicide by swallowing poison.

My maternal grandmother was known to be a bright and beautiful student at school. She attended the Paiyagala Sinhala Catholic School. Adjacent to the school was the Roman Catholic Convent. The nuns liked her and encouraged her to become a nun. She was a prominent member of the church choir. She enjoyed visiting nearby churches with nuns to sing hymns at novenas. She had a bubbly, carefree personalitywho used to bathe in the canal behind the house with her schoolgirl friends. Before reaching her 17th birthday, she married my grandfather after a brief love affair. She was 18 when my mother was born, and 20 when Uncle Anthony was born.

My grandmother had two uncles. One ran a tea shop and a bakery. The tea shop was a popular hangout for railway and bus commuters as it was located at the junction where the Galle Road and Railway Station Road met. Many railway commuters had tea there in the morning before going to work. In the evening, customers had ginger tea with hot buns and roast paan. Some spent time gossiping there until the shop closed at 7 p.m.

The other uncle was a businessman who had lost his wealth because he was unable to recover debts from fellow businessmen. He owned several carts, which he rented to transport graphite from mines to Colombo. I met him when I was about eight years old, during a visit with my mother to Paiyagala. At that time, according to my mother, he was in his late 80s. He lived with my grandmother in her small house.

His long white beard, white sarong, white undershirt, and silver chain around his stomach impressed me. I thought he was a giant. I spent time with him, and he was happy to tell me stories about the First World War and the influenza epidemic in the 1920s. He remembered African soldiers who guarded the aerodrome at Katukurunda during the war. He called them ‘Capiri’ – Kaffirs – (black men). He also remembered an army barrack near Paiyagala. He had heard the rumour that capiris delighted in eating human flesh.

A British poster of the time showed a Capiri with a padlock on his mouth which was read by locals as a proof that the soldiers ate human flesh and therefore the army used padlocks to control them. The real message the poster conveyed was that the British did not want careless talk and rumours that might help enemies to gather intelligence.

At night, I could hear my great-granduncle coughing and moving up and down his room. He had a large flask of hot water and he made his own tea after a long bout of coughing. I slept in the next room and did not feel safe even though I slept next to my mother. I was scared to go to him as I thought he was dying. A heavy curtain partitioned his room into two. On one side, he had his bed and on a small table beside it, he kept his medicine, the flask, and his shaving gear.

I once peeped into the other side of the curtain where I saw an open coffin in an upright position. It was a beautifully varnished with silver handles and a satin-lined interior with frills and trimmings. I was both amazed and scared because it reminded me of death. An image of a dead body flashed in my mind, and I was afraid to leave the great-granduncle’s room. I shouted, “Seeya, Seeya” (grandfather, grandfather). My grandfather came in, carried me to his bed, and comforted me.

Later, Nihal, my elder brother, told me that at night, Seeya had the habit of sending his soul to the coffin to sleep. His coughing was a signal to the soul to return to his body. My mother heard the discussion and scolded Nihal for such talk.

Seeya had bought the coffin to remind himself that death was not far away. Also, he did not want to be a burden on his family after his death. He explained to me that his relatives should just take his dead body in the coffin to the cemetery and bury him. His nephew, Uncle Eusabius, thought keeping a coffin in the room was an insult to the family. When my great granduncle died, Uncle Eusabius destroyed the coffin and bought a new one to bury his uncle.

Soon after the funeral of her husband, my grandmother went mad. She tried to escape from her young neighbour, Clement, who demanded sexual favours from her. She escaped from him by staying with her aunt in Kalutara for several months with her two toddlers. The young neighbour resorted to black magic and aggression to win her over. He followed her wherever she went.

He waited at the canal behind the houses to watch my grandmother bathing and changing clothes.

The young man was the son of a wealthy family in Paiyagala. People treated him as a scholar, a photographer, and a good singer. He helped villagers interpret English-language official documents and, with them, visited government offices in Kalutara to resolve issues such as land transfers and bank transactions. He knew a group of lawyers in Kalutara whom he engaged without fees in villagers’ court cases.

I met Clement once at his residence in Paiyagala. Then Clement was an old man in his late sixties, and I was in my early twenties. He had long grey hair and walked with some difficulty. He had a pipe in his right hand and an aluminium walking stick in the other and a large black scar on his forehead. He wore a pair of baggy blue trousers and a large, light blue, checked short-sleeved shirt. I remember he wore a necklace with large black beads under his shirt.

Clement lived in a large house that needed major repairs. A portion of the front concrete hood had already caved in, and several floor tiles were missing from the verandah. There were two big, dirty and ugly chairs in the foyer; they had lost their box springs a long time ago. I sat on one of them, and my bottom hit the floor.

Clement had wanted to become an engineer, but his father wanted him to read Western classics. He dropped out of the University College in his second year. As a son of a well-to-do family, he thought he could live off his parents’ property. His habit was to roam Paiyagala and nearby villages with his camera, collecting folk stories and photographing nature, women, and social events.

There were a few mango and jackfruit trees in the large, poorly managed garden. Two lemon trees in front of the verandah were wilted. Clement had experimented with a coffee plantation but abandoned it due to an insect infestation. There were many framed old photographs on the walls, which he patiently explained to me in his British accent. He said that his ancestors worked for the Dutch as clerks. When the Dutch left, the British hired them as accountants. He boasted that his great-grandparents bought a large piece of land in the village. He claimed my grandmother’s house was on his land.

Clement and I chatted for more than an hour. He was interested in

discussing the Dutch and British rule in the Kalutara District. He explained how the Dutch and later the British collected revenue from villagers through various taxes and levies. He interrupted our discussion and went inside the house. A little later, he returned with a rolled bundle of papers. He said the papers contain information about his ancestral property and ask me to read them if I was interested. I flipped through them and handed them back to Clement.

Clement claimed that he had studied voodoo practices and black magic under an influential Buddhist monk in the area as his part-time student. His vocation was to help those who wanted to harm others without resorting to physical violence. He told me that he was an atheist but believed in an afterlife and the power of black magic. When I asked him about my grandfather, grandmother, and mother, he went pale, kept silent, and ended the conversation abruptly.

After a few minutes, he said, “Rumours kill more people than black magic.” He said he had enemies who were jealous of him and his family. They had spread rumours to harass him and destroy his good name. He advised me not to believe what people wanted me to believe. He offered me a cup of tea from a tall flask. The tea was cold and unappetizing and I did not drink it.

I asked him, “Why did you help some people to harm others?” “There are evil people, and they should be exposed and punished without resorting to physical violence”, he responded.

“Who appointed you to harm such people?” I inquired. “I love people. Therefore, I harm those who harm them. I want to avoid violence and impulsive behaviour among people.” “Have you ever harmed a woman or a child?” I asked. He said, “Never.”

He was getting angry and impatient. He looked around as if some spirit had possessed him. Eyes half-closed, he rubbed his palms against each other. He tried to smile, but he could not. I thought he might attack me as he got closer to me. We shook hands, and I left him promising to visit him again. He smiled.

My mother was unhappy because I had talked to Clement. She said that he would not hesitate to harm me with his black magic as he was a sick man. She was happy I did not drink his tea: he could have added a charm to the cup to harm me. She began crying and told me how he had harassed my grandmother by begging and then demanding sex from her. When he failed, he focused his evil eye on my mother, who was then a teenager.

Once, he accosted her on her way to the canal. He showed her an old photograph of my grandmother with her long black hair, bathing in the canal. He claimed that he took the photo. When my mother discouraged his advances and threatened to shout, he laughed. He showed the picture again and told my mother that my grandmother was much prettier than my mother. He told her that he could block her from marrying a man or having children by casting a powerful charm on her. My mother could not sleep for months as Clement’s threat haunted her.

My mother had gone through much suffering first as a child and then as a young woman because of Clement. As a child, she remembered various indigenous doctors coming home to treat her mother. Her family tried its best to hide her mental illness, saying she was mourning her husband’s death. My mother firmly believed that Clement’s black magic killed her father. As a young woman, my mother lived in fear that Clement would physically harm her. He sometimes appeared with his camera when she was at the canal washing her clothes and bathing.

I consoled my mother and promised never to talk to Clement again. She kept crying and said that she did not want her sons to visit Paiyagala because of the evil man who lived nearby. I hugged her and waited as various images flashed through my mind. I thought about her agony in living in such an environment without her father, with a sick mother, and a very young brother. Her mother had no income and depended on Eusabius’s uncle for her and her children’s subsistence and physical protection.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.