Farewell Ambassador Qi Zhenhong of China!

Colombo, July 25 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lanka has always been a global trading hub and as result many Envoy appointments are recorded through its long history. Among notable envoys recorded are Emperor Ashoka's Envoys (3rd Century BC), Persian Envoys (2nd Century BC), Roman Envoys (1st Century AD), Chinese Buddhist Scholars (5th Century AD) and Chinese Admiral Zheng He (14th Century AD). Assistance provided by Admiral Zheng He is recorded in the trilingual plaque on display at the national museum in Colombo.

Among notable Sri Lankan Envoys are; trader brothers Thapassu and Balluka (who met the Buddha), Envoys of King Mahanama in China and Rome (1st Century AD) and Ambassador Jayapala of Chilaw in Great China during the Ming Dynasty (14th Century AD). Jayapala is believed to have travelled to China on 6 occasions. It was the peak of the maritime Silk Road when Sri Jayawardenepura became capital under Parakramabahu VI who resided close to ‘Mirihana’ in Jayawardenepura. Above indicates that Sino Lanka diplomatic ties have been stronger than most of Sri Lanka’s bilateral relations.

Ambassador Qi Zhenhong arrived in Sri Lanka in late 2020 when Sri Lanka was combating COVID – 19 under President Gotabaya who ruled the country from Mirihana. Sri Lankans may remember the simple arrival ceremony Chinese Embassy held on advice of Ambassador Qi Zhenhong respecting the health guidelines of Sri Lanka to prevent the spread of COVID – 19.

Ambassador Qi was one of the first to organise free COVID vaccines for Sri Lankans. He will have special memories about Sri Lanka as he witnessed; Sri Lankans fighting COVID -19, mismanaging and re-energising the economy, the peoples uprising (Aragalaya) and the rule of three Executive Presidents. Sri Lankans celebrated the 65th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Peoples Republic of China and Sri Lanka in 2022. In the same year the 70th anniversary of signing the Rubber Rice Pact with China was also marked. China is revisiting the ancient Silk Road for global human development with the four global initiatives (Global Security Initiative, Global Governance Initiative, Global Civilisation Initiative and the Global Development Initiative) supported by the Belt and Road Initiative. As the UN General Assembly has endorsed these initiatives, it is important for Sri Lanka to get more involved with those to re-energise the economy.