Tokyo Cement Reports Steady results for FY25/26 Q2 as construction sector rebounds

Tokyo Cement Group (Tokyo Cement) reported a turnover of Rs. 16,322 million and a Profit After Tax (PAT) of Rs. 1,003 million for the 2nd Quarter ending 30th September 2025, compared to a turnover of Rs. 13,833 million and a PAT of Rs. 1,082 million, in the same period last year. Whilst volume growth remained stable quarter-on-quarter, profit margins contracted with the capitalisation of the Trincomalee expansion projects.

The quarter started with renewed optimism, highlighting a sustained boom in construction activities. Manufacturers and suppliers of construction materials reported continued volume growth, supported by a stable pricing environment, which further propelled sectoral performance. Reflecting the industry’s steady recovery, September recorded the highest sales volumes in cement sales since the onset of the 2022 economic crisis. Another key enabler of this growth was the notably lesser rainfall experienced in 2025 compared to the previous two years, which allowed construction sites to operate relatively uninterrupted.

Lower interest rates and improved macroeconomic stability spurred a significant expansion in private sector credit, driving increased investment activity across both construction and real estate sectors. Developers of large-scale residential and mixed-use projects capitalised on the low-interest environment by introducing attractive financing schemes, stimulating end-user demand. This momentum was further reinforced by government-led infrastructure development projects starting with the Kadawatha-Mirigama section of the Central Expressway and several other regional developments undertaken by local government bodies.

Robust fiscal performance was underpinned by improved government revenue collection, whilst the economy was estimated to have grown by 4.8% during the first half of 2025. Notable improvements in inflows from tourism and workers’ remittances helped stabilise the Rupee’s performance against the Dollar, and led to an upgrade in the country’s sovereign rating by all three major rating agencies.

The recently announced credit rating upgrades coupled with a positive fiscal trajectory, signaled that the country is within reach of achieving its short-term fiscal targets. This reaffirms a steady recovery from the economic challenges that plagued the business environment in the past years.

The continuation of low interest rates, a stable currency, and subdued inflation over the medium to long term is expected to sustain this growth momentum, despite temporary shocks that may arise due to weather disruptions and energy cost fluctuations that can impact inflation targets.

Seylan Bank records an impressive Profit after Tax of LKR 8.33 Bn by Q3 2025

HNB Assurance and Bank of Ceylon sign strategic MoU to strengthen bancassurance offering

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.