HRCSL calls for report on alleged illegal Customs detention of consignment of Holy Quran in Tamil

Complainant claims Customs detention of consignment of Holy Quran sets a dangerous precedent of State interference in religious texts

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya calls for report from Customs

The Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka (HRCSL) has directed the Sri Lanka Customs to submit its report on a complaint of the ‘unlawful and illegal detention of a consignment of Holy Quran (Tamil) in violation of Fundamental Rights’ received by the HRCSL.

The complaint filed with HRCSL by an Attorney at Law on behalf of the Sri Lankan Muslims alleges that the rights guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution have been violated by the Sri Lanka Customs allegedly acting on the ‘interference of a former secretary of the Defence Ministry purporting to act on behalf of the then Government of Sri Lanka’.

The complaint alleges that the illegal detention of the Holy Quran “unfairly targets the Muslim minority and sets a dangerous precedent of State interference in religious texts”.

“On all previous occasions the identical Holy Quran (in Tamil) have been cleared by the Customs without any unlawful or wrongful restraint, detention or obstruction and the continued detention from 16 May 2024, only in respect of the religious texts of Islam, with no such or similar restriction on any of the texts of the other religions constitute an arbitrary and irrational denial of equality before the law, equal protection of the law and discrimination on the grounds of ‘religion’ and ‘language’, the HRCSL complainant has alleged.

“The detention is disrespectful and violate of the sanctity of the Holy Quran, a scripture revered by billions of Muslims worldwide. The illegal act of the Customs infringes the protection given in Article 10 of the Constitution of the entitlement of every person to freedom of thought, conscience and religion”.

This consignment of the Holy Quran in Tamil, the complaint states, has come as a gift to the Sri Lankan Muslims from Mecca, since for most Muslims in Sri Lanka, Tamil is their mother tongue.

Meanwhile Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya has also called for a report from Customs following representations made to her by the National Shoora Council for the immediate release of the Holy Quran consignment.