EDB, University of Kelaniya launch first-ever joint initiative to boost electronics export sector

Seminar and mini innovation exhibition brings together over 50 participants and 30 new products; marks new University–EDB–industry collaboration model

The Export Development Board (EDB) in collaboration with University of Kelaniya organised a seminar and a mini innovation exhibition for the Sri Lankan electronic and electrical sector exporters and manufacturers on 3 September 2026 at the University of Kelaniya.

This was organised with the assistance of Centre for Technology Transfer and Industry Linkage (CTTIL), University Incubation Centre (UIC), and Electronics Design and Innovation Centre (EDIC) of University of Kelaniya.

The event marked the first ever University–EDB–Industry collaboration to provide R&D support, Intellectual Property (IP) support, Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools for International marketing with expert support for new product development to increase exports in the Sri Lankan Electronic and Electrical sector.

Over 50 participants attended this seminar and more than 30 new products on display at the mini exhibition. The expert panel from University of Kelaniya, Industry, and EDB provided them with information on how to improve their product quality, marketing, technology, standards, cost efficiency, and IP rights using innovative tools.

Faculty of Science Dean Prof. Jeewantha Premaratne, Faculty of Science former Dean Senior Prof. Sudath Kalingamudali, Centre for Technology Transfer and Industry Linkage, University Incubation Centre and Electronics Design and Innovation Centre Director Prof. Aruna Ranaweera, Central Business Incubator Director  Dr. Deepani Wijethunga delivered speeches on R&D, testing, cost improvements, quality, and IP opportunities and other services available at University of Kelaniya.

Lanka Technology Manufacturers (LTM) General Manager Chaturanga Kuruppu delivered a session on the usage of AI tools to promote international business and finding new buyers. EDB Deputy Director Akila De Zoysa explained about the objectives of the seminar cum mini exhibition and the present status of the Sri Lankan Electronic and Electrical sector.

The event provided a platform for university academia and industry to connect, share knowledge, and discuss the latest trends and advancements in Electronic and Electrical assembly to develop their products through Innovations, R&D, IP, AI, testing, and quality improvements.

The seminar also featured a panel discussion where the industry representatives had an opportunity to resolve various issues in the Product Development Life Cycle.