New Year’s Eve …mega happenings

Yes, the festive season is fast approaching and, I’m sure, most of the venues, countrywide, are already working out their entertainment programme, especially for the month of December.

No doubt, the spotlight will be focused on Colombo … and the mega happenings on New Year’s Eve!

I’m told there’s an awesome New Year’s Eve party coming up at the City of Dreams, Cinnamon Life hotel’s spanking new state-of-the-art Lumina ballroom, and they are calling it ‘Dancing Thru The Decades.’

The lineup for this particular New Year’s Eve party is awesome.

At the helm will be the legendary singer/entertainer Sohan Weerasinghe and he knows exactly what is required to make a New Year’s event a success.

The 31st night party will also have Corrine, Falan, Geoffrey, Rukshan, Clifford and Damian doing the needful to give the large crowd expected and evening loaded with fun and excitement.

The bands in attendance will be the ever popular Flame (just back from a successful tour of Australia), and AROH – a versatile, vibrant band with a very wide repertoire to suit any occasion.

‘Dancing Thru The Decades’ will open up by bringing nostalgia to those who love the kind of music, associated with New Year’s Eve, and then boom away with the sounds that the younger folks love … till dawn!

The evening’s proceedings will be handled by the now famous Kumar de Silva and he certainly knows how to do justice to such a prestigious event, with his witty compering.

There will be prizes and surprises for the guests, including airline tickets, and lots more … not forgetting the sumptuous New Year’s Eve buffet and Sri Lankan style breakfast.

The dynamic CEO of  Cinnamon Life Sanjiv Hulugalle with Sohan

Sohan and the entire Cinnamon Life team handling this project, including CEO Sanjiv Hulugalle, enthusiastically said they are going to make ‘Dancing Thru The Decades’ the dance of the year.

Sohan also added there is an early bird offer and that reservations are coming in already … from abroad as well.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.