Japan provides assistance to improve educational infrastructure in North and East

Japanese Ambassador Akio Isomata on Wednesday signed grant contracts for two projects under the scheme of “Grant Assistance for Grassroots Human Security Projects (GGP)”.

The contracts were signed with Child Action Lanka Founder and CEO Debbie Edirisinghe, and Kattankudy Multipurpose Co-operative Society President M.I.M. Thaiyoob.

The Government of Japan has provided $ 64,594 (approx. Rs. 20 million) for a project implemented by Child Action Lanka. This project involves constructing a new child development centre which includes kindergarten rooms, an IT room, and other facilities, as well as renovating existing kindergarten classrooms into a residential shelter. This shelter will protect women and girls from domestic violence and support disadvantaged girls who face barriers to their access to schools due to their economic situations in Kilinochchi District, Northern Province.

Additionally, $ 39,249 (approx. Rs. 12 million) have been provided for a project implemented by the Kattankudy Multipurpose Co-operative Society Limited. This grant aims to renovate a school canteen to ensure stable provision of highly nutritious meals at affordable prices, thereby contributing to the improvement of the dietary environment for 2,100 students.

Emphasising Japan’s focus on the conflict-affected Northern and Eastern Provinces in its assistance for Sri Lanka, Ambassador ISOMATA remarked: “During the official visit by President Dissanayake to Japan last September, the two leaders of Japan and Sri Lanka affirmed the importance of addressing challenges of conflict-affected communities in the Northern and Eastern Provinces. Bearing in mind that national reconciliation and socio-economic development are closely interconnected, the Japanese side reaffirmed its commitment to continuing its support for the development of these provinces.” Ambassador also said: “The projects signed today will not only contribute to the enhancement of the quality of life of beneficiaries and socio-economic development of the country, but will also stand as enduring symbols of the unwavering friendship between the peoples of Japan and Sri Lanka.”

Debbie Edirisinghe said: We are proud that this project will directly support around 200 children and young people, while also reaching out to over 750 people in the wider community. Child Action Lanka is honoured to work with the Embassy of Japan to keep our children safe and ensure they get the education they truly deserve.

Together, we aren’t just building a centre; we’re creating a real home for learning—a safe space where even the most vulnerable children can feel protected, happy, and ready to reach their full potential.”

Thaiyoob said: “The Kattankudy Central College is very grateful to the Embassy of Japan for funding for the canteen renovation project. The school’s original canteen was severely damaged during the 2004 tsunami and 2,100 students were unable to access hygienic, nutritious, and safe meals. This initiative will enhance student welfare, improve learning conditions. Heartfelt thanks to the government and people of Japan”

Since 1989, Japan has been providing a total of $ 62 million in assistance for Sri Lanka through the GGP (Grant Assistance for Grassroots Human Security Projects) scheme.