VFS Global launches Republic of Korea visa services in Sri Lanka

Miyon Lee, Former Ambassador of the Republic of Korea to Sri Lanka and Maldives (second from left), Jung Haesung, Third Secretary and Consul, Embassy of the Republic of Korea (third from left) along with Manpreet Singh Arora, Country Manager, Sri Lanka and Maldives, VFS Global at the inauguration ceremony.

VFS Global has announced the launch of South Korea visa services in Sri Lanka through a state-of-the-art Korea Visa Application Centre in Colombo, providing an enhanced visa application experience for Korea visa applicants in the country.

Starting 21 August 2026, Korea visa applicants across Sri Lanka will be able to submit their applications at the new Korea Visa Application Centre in Colombo by booking a prior appointment online.

Eunji KANG, Deputy Head of Mission of the Embassy of the Republic of Korea in Sri Lanka, said, “I hope that the Embassy’s cooperation with VFS Global Visa Application Centre would contribute to providing greater convenience and improved services for visa applicants.”

Yummi Talwar, Chief Operating Officer - South Asia, VFS Global, said, “The launch of our Korea Visa Application Centre marks a significant step in improving the visa application submission experience for travellers across Sri Lanka. This spacious, modern, and centrally located facility offers a comfortable and convenient application environment, supported by well-trained customer service representatives who will assist applicants at every step of their journey.

VFS Global has been a trusted partner for the Government of the Republic of Korea for visa processing services since 2011. The company offers visa services on behalf of the Republic of Korea across 5 countries through a network of 7 dedicated visa application centres globally.

VFS Global’s role in the visa application process is limited to front-end administrative tasks only, which include collecting visa application forms, required documentation as per the checklist, and enroll biometrics. VFS Global has no role in the decision-making process of granting or refusing a visa. Decision making on the granting or refusal of visa is the sole prerogative and sole responsibility of the concerned Embassy.

Applicants are encouraged to obtain the latest information on visa requirements, fees, appointment booking, and available services only through the official website of the Embassy of the Republic of Korea and the official VFS Global website.