Chinese groups clash at Port City; one abducted and killed

A clash between two groups of Chinese nationals at Colombo Port City ended in the alleged abduction and murder of one man yesterday, with police recovering his body hours later in Eheliyagoda and arresting two suspects as they allegedly attempted to flee the country.

Police said three Chinese nationals had arrived at Colombo Port City in a hired cab during the early hours of yesterday to fish when another group of Chinese nationals arrived in two vehicles and launched a violent assault on them.

During the confrontation, one of the victims was allegedly abducted by the assailants. Police said the attackers fled the scene after abandoning one of their vans, inside which officers recovered an air pistol.

The victim’s body was later discovered concealed beneath a pile of rocks in a forest in the Karandana Gettukade area of Eheliyagoda after officers conducting a raid on illegal liquor noticed a human hand protruding from the stones.

Police subsequently identified the deceased as the Chinese national who had been abducted from Colombo Port City. The body was transferred to the Avissawella Hospital for a post-mortem examination and further forensic investigations.

Investigators also recovered a car near the site where the body was found, which they believe was used to transport the victim after the abduction.

Police said two Chinese nationals were arrested at the Bandaranaike International Airport while allegedly attempting to leave Sri Lanka. They have been handed over to the Foreshore Police for further investigations.

In a statement, the Chinese Embassy in Sri Lanka said it was closely monitoring developments and had requested a full investigation by the Sri Lankan authorities.

“The Chinese Embassy is closely following the case and has urged the Sri Lankan police to conduct a thorough investigation to establish the facts as soon as possible and safeguard the personal safety and lawful rights and interests of Chinese citizens. The Embassy reminds Chinese citizens in Sri Lanka to enhance their safety awareness, and in case of emergency, report to the police promptly and contact the Embassy for assistance.”