Russian ballistic missile strike on Kyiv kills 14 and injures 22, officials say

BBC - Russia has attacked Ukraine with ballistic missiles and drones, killing 14 people and leaving at least 22 injured in one of the deadliest strikes across Kyiv this year.

During the attack, which started after midnight on Wednesday, the head of Kyiv's military administration, Timur Tkachenko, said the "enemy is once again massively attacking the Kyiv region".

Air raid alerts were in place for more than an hour as waves of ballistic missiles hit the city and its outskirts. Kyiv's military administration said the barrage damaged residential buildings and warehouses.

Tkachenko said nine people were killed in the Boryspil district, four in the Bucha district, and one in the Fastiv district.

The Russia defence ministry said it had struck logistics hubs and supply centres in Kyiv and the surrounding region.

"These centres were involved in the storage, delivery of various weapons and military supplies, as well as in the production and distribution of unmanned aerial vehicles," it said.

It also said it had also hit three cargo vessels "which were transporting weapons and military equipment" near the Black Sea port of Odesa.

Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko said there were fears people could be trapped under rubble after strikes on the centre of the city.

He noted on Telegram that four of the injured people were in serious condition.

"The enemy is once again deliberately striking civilians and civilian infrastructure," Kyiv's military administration said.

Russia has intensified attacks on Kyiv in recent weeks, while Ukraine has also increased its attacks on Russian civilian infrastructure, including power facilities.

It has also repeatedly targeted depots of the Russian e-commerce giant Wildberries. Five people were killed and 10 wounded in the Moscow region on Tuesday morning in the most recent strikes on Wildberries warehouses.

The day before, Russian officials say seven people were killed and 58 injured in a drone attack on a busy beach in the southern Krasnodar region as tourists look on.

Ukraine, meanwhile, expressed outrage over a video showing a man chased by a drone in Kherson, calling it a deliberate "hunt" and "safari" targeting civilians.

Ukraine has urged allies for more US-made Patriot missile interceptors to defend against Russian ballistic attacks.