Home Lands Group expands presence in Port City Colombo

Home Lands Group has marked another significant milestone with the acquisition of its second land parcel within Port City Colombo’s prestigious Central Park District.

The newly acquired land parcel spanning over 3 acres in extent, is similar in size and located adjacent to the land previously purchased for the landmark Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo development, further strengthening Home Lands’ growing footprint within Sri Lanka’s most ambitious urban development project.

The official signing ceremony for the acquisition of the new land parcel took place at Port City Colombo. The event was attended by Bai Yinzhan, Chairman of China Harbor Engineering Company Ltd; Wang Gang, Managing Director of China Harbour Engineering Company Ltd South Asia and South East Asia, Xiong Hongfeng, Managing Director of CHEC Port City Colombo and Nalin Herath, Chairman and Managing Director of Home Lands Group, along with senior representatives of both CHEC Port City Colombo and Home Lands Group.

Home Lands’ decision to further expand its presence within Port City Colombo reflects both confidence in the city’s future and the company’s own financial strength and long-term strategic vision.

Notably, the acquisition has been undertaken entirely by Home Lands as a single-developer investment, demonstrating the company’s financial stability, investment capacity, and commitment to driving transformative developments independently.

The new land acquisition comes just three months after Home Lands secured the land parcel for its recently launched twin tower high-rise development, Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo, demonstrating the company’s continued confidence in the strategic importance of the Central Park District at Port City Colombo.

The Central Park District’s 40-acre modern lush green parkland with scenic waterways, combined with futuristic high-rise developments offer a unique eco-system where residents can live an enriched life amidst nature, greenery, high-rise luxury and Indian Ocen views.

Chairman and Managing Director of Home Lands Group, Nalin Herath stated, “Home Lands is proud to make another strategic investment within Port City Colombo, reaffirming our confidence not only in this landmark development but also in Sri Lanka’s future. Every investment we make is ultimately an investment in the growth, progress, and potential of our nation.”

While Port City Colombo continues to evolve into one of South Asia’s most significant urban developments, Home Lands’ latest acquisition further reinforces the company’s position as the pioneering force that’s taking Sri Lankan real estate to the world.

A master-planned city developed to international standards, Port City Colombo has been envisioned as a next-generation urban destination designed to attract international investment, global businesses, and world-class developments.

Home Lands has been shaping the nation’s real estate landscape with a legacy built on trust, innovation, and excellence. Home Lands is the pioneer of resort-style residential developments in Sri Lanka and continues to redefine modern living, setting new benchmarks in quality, design, and lifestyle. As a fully integrated group of 14 companies, including its own construction arm, Heyraa Construction, holding the highest CS2 grading from CIDA, Home Lands delivers end-to-end solutions across real estate, construction, property management, and lifestyle creation, ensuring uncompromised quality, innovation, and customer satisfaction.

With a growing global presence and offices in Australia, Dubai, and London, Home Lands serves both local and international clients, delivering landmark residential projects across the country.

Home Lands has earned multiple accolades, including the Best Developer – Sri Lanka award at the PropertyGuru Asia Property Awards for three consecutive years, and in 2025 was honoured with Superbrands status, becoming the only real estate Superbrand in Sri Lanka.