ComBank leads Sri Lanka’s SME lending for fifth consecutive year

The Commercial Bank of Ceylon has once again emerged as the country’s largest lender to small and medium enterprises (SMEs), retaining its position for the fifth consecutive year, according to the Ministry of Finance’s Final Budget Position Report for 2024.

The report shows that Commercial Bank disbursed Rs. 330.9 billion in SME loans in 2024, representing 30.3% of the Rs. 1,090 billion provided by 16 state and private sector banks. This places the Bank significantly ahead of all other institutions, leading the industry with SME lending that is 91% higher than that of the nearest competitor.

The Bank’s support extended across Agriculture, Services, Industries and Other sectors, with its most substantial contribution directed to Industries. Commercial Bank lent Rs. 266.8 billion to this sector alone, accounting for 47.8% of the Rs. 557.6 billion in total loans received by Sri Lanka’s industrial enterprises in 2024.

This performance underscores Commercial Bank’s sustained and strategic engagement to power the SME sector, a critical driver of employment, value creation and economic stability.

Commenting on the Bank’s continuing leadership in this sphere, Sanath Manatunge, Managing Director/CEO of Commercial Bank said: “Our commitment to SMEs is rooted in the belief that their success is inseparable from the country’s economic future. In 2024, the Bank’s SME-focused initiatives positively impacted over 8,700 businesses, driving job creation, community development and economic inclusion. And as the country responds to the impact of the cyclone, Commercial Bank will continue to stand with SMEs, supporting their recovery and helping Sri Lanka rebuild.”

“The Ministry of Finance’s confirmation that we remain the largest lender to SMEs for the fifth consecutive year is a direct result of this purpose-driven approach. We will continue to expand access to finance, deploy technology that accelerates SME growth, and provide the guidance and support needed for businesses to withstand challenges and scale sustainably.”

Over the years, Commercial Bank has maintained a robust approach to SME development through targeted lending, capacity building, advisory support, and digital enablement. This approach creates additional value for enterprises by strengthening business capabilities and supporting long-term sustainability, complemented by early engagement mechanisms through the Bank’s dedicated Business Revival and Rehabilitation Unit, established to support enterprises showing signs of distress. In addition, ComBank LEAP | GlobalLinker further strengthens SME growth by connecting businesses to new markets, partnerships, practical knowledge resources, and a wider ecosystem that supports scale and competitiveness.

MSF supports Sri Lanka flood relief with delivery of winterized tents to Disaster Management Center

AIA sets benchmark as Most Valuable Insurance Brand in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.