People’s Bank expands digital banking network with 125th cheque deposit kiosk

People’s Bank last week launched its 125th Cheque Deposit Kiosk (CDK), further strengthening its position as a leader in digital banking innovation in Sri Lanka.

The milestone kiosk was opened at the Self Banking Unit of the bank’s Mid City Branch under the patronage of Chief Executive Officer/General Manager Clive Fonseka. The achievement comes during the bank’s 65th anniversary year and marks the highest number of cheque deposit kiosks deployed by a commercial bank in Sri Lanka to date.

People’s Bank introduced its first CDK in July 2021 to coincide with its 60th anniversary, as part of its efforts to provide technology-driven and customer-friendly banking solutions.

The kiosk facility enables customers to deposit cheques without completing traditional deposit slips. Customers are required to enter only basic details such as their account number, NIC number and telephone number, after which the machine captures cheque images for verification before completing the transaction and issuing an acknowledgement receipt.

The bank has also introduced an e-receipt facility, allowing customers to receive a secure link via SMS to access details of deposited cheques, including images.

Available round the clock at Self Banking Units islandwide, the CDKs allow customers, particularly current account holders, to deposit daily collections after business hours while reducing the need to retain cheques overnight.

People’s Bank has also introduced digital endorsement for cheques deposited through CDKs, becoming the first commercial bank in Sri Lanka to implement the feature, which supports a fully digital cheque processing system.

People’s Bank Deputy General Manager (Recoveries) Naleen Pathiranage, Deputy General Manager (Channel Management) Aruni Liyanagunawardana, Assistant General Manager (Centralized Back Office) Shantha Gangabadage, Assistant General Manager (Channel Management) I.K. Indika, Regional Manager (Colombo North) Amitha Sanjeewani, Assistant Regional Managers, Branch Manager, staff, and customers participated in the event.

HNB, KDU join hands to expand higher education financing opportunities

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.