Walk For Peace: An Eventful Week In Focus (21st – 28th April)

The first part of this write-up touches on the peace walk in itself, led by Ven Pannakara Thero, who has become a spiritual icon for Buddhists all over the world viz-a-viz the most-watched, most-liked and most-revered personality over the past week. As a matter of fact, Walk for Peace is a novel initiative conceptualised and grounded on the tenets of Buddhist Doctrine of peace, non-violence and loving kindness. It could not have come at a better time, when the world is engulfed in a myriad of crises and conflicts, leading to widespread chaos, uncertainty and suffering. In the circumstances, Bhante Pannakar’s clarion call for peace, harmony and compassion is timely for all intents and purposes.

The week of 21st – 28th April was eventful, characterised by mind-boggling, emotionally-overwhelming and spiritually-significant events and moments for the entire nation. The most noteworthy of them, was the arrival of Bhante Pannakara accompanied by a delegation of monks and Aloka, on a Walk for Peace – with a message of compassion and loving kindness. Indeed, the Walk for Peace Initiative is unparalleled in the annals of Sri Lanka’s 2600-year long Buddhist history. In fact, the 7-day-long walk inter-alia captivated an entire nation, as millions of people turned out on the streets from Anuradhapura to Colombo in a spirit of unity, and in celebration of this one-of-a-kind epic journey of peace, regardless of their religious, ethnic, caste, creed and political differences.

Walk for Peace – An Epitome of Humanity, Spirituality and Mindfulness

The Walk for Peace was no ordinary event, but one-in-a-generation event, and one that captivated the whole-of-nation attention, and one that evoked a feeling of humanity, spirituality and empathy in the minds of many. It was the most impactful event of the week in terms of its utmost spiritual significance and outreach. The walk culminated in Colombo on 28th, where Bhante Pannakara was officially presented with the Buddha’s Sacred Relics and a sapling of the Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Tree by President A.K. Dissanayake at a dignified elegant ceremony. The week from 21st – 28th, inter-alia heralded a turning point in Sri Lanka’s religious landscape, akin to that of a “spiritual adventure” – in which people in masses across the length and breadth of the country stood in unity and purpose, and embraced the peace journey with solace and empathy, testament to the overarching spiritual legacy of Sri Lanka, prided itself on its rich Buddhist heritage, culture and history. During the Walk for Peace, Bhante Pannakara and the delegation of monks visited the Temple of the Sacred Tooth Relic and paid homage to the Sacred Tooth Relic of Buddha. They also called on the Chief Prelates of the three main Buddhist Chapters (Nikayas) of Siam, Amarapura and Ramanna, and other Buddhist prelates in Anuradhapura, Dambulla, Kandy and Colombo.

Bhante Pannakara –  A Champion of Mindful Living and Spiritual Icon

In a world full of anger, hatred, delusionary trends and antics, that keep testing peoples’ will power with an urge to chase more to become more, there are a rare few who pause and ask a deeper question : is this really enough. It is from that realization that a meaningful journey begins. A journey towards self-awakening and realization. Bhante Pannakara Thero today embodies that journey, choosing a path beyond worldly pursuits. He now walks with a purpose, reason and commitment, rooted in loving kindness and understanding, touching minds and inspiring hearts, and spreading a message that the world needs now more than ever : A message of inner peace, mindfulness and boundless compassion.

Suffice it to note, Bhante’s peace walk culminated in an outpouring sense of euphoria, spirituality and empathy viz-a-viz leading to an awareness and understanding of Buddhist practices and Buddhist way of life among peoples across the country. It was a living testimony that large crowds of people in tens of thousands flocked the walk for peace path, united in spirit, faith and diversity. The historic walk for peace in Sri Lanka is sure to inspire people of faith and the like-minded across the world in the name of Buddha’s path for liberation, emancipation and self-awakening.

Rare Sighting of Spirits of Divinity – Colorful Rays of Light

Upon his arrival in the historic city of Anuradhapura on 22nd, Bhante Pannakara paid homage to Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Tree, officially recognized as the oldest living human-planted tree in the world, with a documented history of over 2,250 years. Its lineage could be traced back to the original sacred Bodhi Tree in Bodhgaya, under which Buddha gained enlightenment nearly 2600 years ago. Following a brief but elegant ceremony, Bhante was presented with a sapling of the Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Tree by the Chief Custodian of the Atamasthanaya, (8 sacred religious sites within Anuradhapura Sacred city) signifying a profound moment for all Buddhists in Sri Lanka and around the world. The performance of such holy and meritorious deeds seldom tends to radiate colorful beams of light – often attributed to virtual display of divine powers and spirits of God. The offering of the sapling to Bhante on 22nd, coincided with such a magical phenomenon in which the sky above the sacred city was transformed into a breathtaking view of multicolored layers of light, as if Bhante is bestowed with the nature’s blessing – in rejoicing his noble mission for self-awakening and emancipation. In a spiritual sense, it represents a mystic display of divinity and spirituality in virtual vivid colors  – in celebration of the dawning of a sacred mission and offering spiritual blessings for Bhante Pannakara and the whole of humanity.

In what could be termed as a historic feat, the Walk for Peace indeed marked a new chapter in Sri Lanka-US relations, in the context of spiritual awakening and mindful living among people of faith and the like-minded in America. The events unfolded during the week-long pilgrimage proved the vitality of Bhante’s message for world peace for the whole of humanity. The walk for peace is sure to open new vistas of Sri Lanka – US relations, enabling Sri Lanka to project itself as a center of spiritual excellence for the propagation of Buddhist philosophy and Dhamma doctrine worldwide.

The Sacred Relics and Bo Sapling presented to Bhante Pannakara will be flown into Texas accompanied by Bhante himself on his return home. The Buddhists followers and the like-minded in America would be able to pay homage to the Sacred Relics once they are on public exposition at the Buddhist Monastery in Texas in time for Vesak celebrations in May which is the first of its kind in America. Afterall, Buddha sacred relics indeed are as sacred, spiritual and worthy of veneration as the Buddha himself in person. It is noteworthy, the sacred relics had been extracted from the ashes of the Buddha’s cremated body in India around 2600 years ago, while the origins of the tree sapling could be traced back to the sacred Bodhi Tree at Bodhgaya in India, under which Buddha attained Enlightenment, which itself is a historic feat.

The Walk for Peace has galvanized a mass movement of people throughout the journey. In their walk for peace, the monks took the opportunity to hold what were supposed to be traditional blessings, prayers and sermons on mindfulness which is a hot topic in this day and age. Those who joined such occasions were genuinely excited to see monks and hear their blessings. Their epic journey is historic and couldn’t have come at a better time, when people across the world are in pursuit of self-centred egos and self-seeking pleasures, due to their inherent sensual desires and sensations, such as greed, cravings and attachment (clinging). In his routine sermons along the path, Bhante Pannakara emphasized the fact that “Peace is not a destination, It’s a way of life. And that peace resides within each of us. The walk is a reminder that unity and kindness begin within each of us and can radiate outward to communities, families and society as a whole. Even though we have different beliefs, we all have one religion and one faith in common, which is – Religion of Peace, Compassion and Loving Kindness – This is what all beings are seeking”.

In fact, according to Vasala Sutra (Discourse on Outcastes), which is a key scripture within the Buddhist Canon, the Buddha said, “No person shall become a saint or devil by birth or family lineage, and, that it is one’s own acts and karma (thoughts and deeds) that make one – a saint or demon”. In essence, conquering one’s own mind is the key to achieving inner peace, sanity and freedom from the tyranny of uncontrolled desires, leading to a more fulfilling and purposeful existence which is what peace is all about.

The Walk for Peace led by the group of monks is a clear manifestation of the absolute limits of physical and mental endurance, showcasing their profound resilience and strength throughout the journey which is no easy task by any standards. Relying on their inherent will power and high-end stamina, the monks kept going on their noble mission unabated, despite having to put up with hazardous and arduous paths testing their limits, yet with no signs of any slowing down or exhaustion. Indeed, it’s so captivating that they kept the momentum for almost 7 days in a row with no respite, becoming even stronger and unwavering with each day passing. In the end, they accomplished a “seemingly impossible task”, while braving significant odds. In other words, it’s a worthy mission in every sense of the word, with a tenacious spirit and a clear purpose, thus inspiring and awakening others around, on the significance of harmonizing one’s daily life and deeds with inner spirits and core values of Buddhism. Indeed, the monks have consciously advocated mindfulness and practiced the path of self-awakening, in all but name, testing their

sheer will-power by letting go of their egoistic sense of self. That is exactly what the monks meant in their spiritual “walk for peace initiative”, leading to “one mindful step at a time.

Bhante Pannaka thero has been an ordained monk for 17 years, and has made a vow for himself – to dedicate his life for the propagation of Buddhist teachings and way of life for the spiritual emancipation of all beings, and preserve the Buddhist heritage for posterity. Conceptualized on Buddha’s noble teachings, Bhante Pannakara’s one-of-a-kind mission is to build a Buddhist complex called Dhammachethiya on a 14-acre land in Texas, to be converted into a fully-fledged centre of spiritual excellence comprised of ancient scriptures, stupas and sacred objects for the benefit of future generations. The project was the brainchild of Bhante himself – based on his overwhelming concerns that the excessive use of AI, online platforms and software tools in this day and age, could be of potential danger and nuisance – placing Buddhist heritage, literature and Dhamma scripts at significant risk of being covertly altered, doctored and faked, thus compromising the sanctity, ethics and morality of Buddhism, and ending-up in the hands of the next generation of youth, often lacking authenticity, originality, senses of spirit, and core message and values.

In summing up, and for all compelling reasons, the Walk for Peace Initiative cannot be understated, which, inter-alia has captivated the hearts and minds of millions of people across the country, underscoring their trust and faith in Buddhist philosophy and its path for inner peace and liberation, worthy of humanity.

“We are what we think. All that we are arises with our thoughts. With our thoughts, we make the world.” – Buddha

My write-ups in the Colombo Telegraph on the 2300-mile: 110-day Walk for Peace led by Bhante Pannakara from Fortworth, Texas to Washington DC from 27th October 2025 to 12th February 2026.

1. Monks’ Epic Journey For Peace Captivates People Across America – 06th January 2026

2. Monks’ Silent Peaceful Walk Has Shaken American Soul – 14th February 2026

*The writer is a retired Ambassador and Foreign Ministry Spokesman. He can be reached at schandrad@hotmail.com