Loneliness: Scourge of modern life

I did not see my best friend Roy (not his real name) for some time. When I made inquiries from his family, I was told that he had gone to Australia to spend his retirement. One day my phone rang and a familiar voice greeted me. It was Roy. I was overjoyed to hear his voice. I asked him, “Are you going to spend the rest of your life there?” “No I am back in Sri Lanka,” he said. He went on to say that he returned to Sri Lanka as he felt very lonely in Australia. “When my daughter and her husband go for work, I was left alone in the house. I had no one to talk to. All the people are busy earning their livelihood. They have no time to talk to others,” he said sadly.

Roy is one of many people who feel lonely for no fault of theirs. Loneliness, or social isolation, is a serious problem in modern life. When children go abroad for higher education, or employment, their parents are left alone to fend for themselves. The children may send large amounts of money but the parents feel lonely. The situation becomes worse when one spouse dies leaving the other to live alone. For such a person loneliness can be unbearable.

Simply because you feel lonely in your old age you cannot prevent your children from going abroad. Therefore you have to find ways and means to face up to the situation. You cannot stay indoors all the time because you are on your own. You cannot go out alone and you have no one to keep company with. Lonely people are easy victims of depression. When you do not meet anyone or find no one to talk to life becomes miserable.

Psychologists see loneliness as the hidden epidemic of the 21st century. It is a matter of concern at the highest levels. Sometimes loneliness is not confined to old people. There are many young mothers and teenagers who feel isolated in their own homes. Agony columns in newspapers and magazines are full of letters sent by teenagers who feel lonely. They usually complain that when their parents go for work they are isolated. As a result it is easy for anyone to feel lonely in a hectic world. If your loved ones are away most of the time and they do not spare a moment to be with you, you feel miserable.

The epidemic is not confined to developing countries, such as Sri Lanka. Loneliness is a serious problem in developed countries as well. In major cities you find houses occupied by single parents. Their children have gone abroad for higher studies or employment. According to the Australian Loneliness Report, more than one quarter of Australians feel lonely. Even in the United States a survey has revealed that many people over 45 feel lonely. In Japan the percentage of lonely elderly people is on the increase. The situation has become acute with low birth rates of babies. The phenomenon of dying alone in Japan is known as kudokushi.

You do not need a medical expert to tell you that loneliness is injurious to health. Loneliness is linked to a range of problems, including high blood pressure, weakened immune system, cardio vascular diseases, depression and strokes. What is more, lonely people are likely to die prematurely. Some experts compare loneliness to smoking 15 cigarettes a day!

Frome, a town in south-west England, is at the centre of a health initiative that is having a remarkable effect on both isolation and the health problems associated with it. The project helps local residents to find the kind of support and activities they want from community groups and a network of volunteers. This would be an ideal model even for other countries. Even the doctors who treat lonely people are encouraged to do so with compassion in addition to prescribing medicines. The project has initiated a range of activities, including choir singing and weight management through mutual support groups. There are about 650 trained volunteers. The participants also attend group classes and help in setting health-related goals.

If you feel lonely, try to have more connections with others. Supporting others is a two-way process. You support others and they will support you in return. Not only lonely people but also others can benefit from having more connections and support from others. Everybody is mutually helped up to the next level and you will see a knock-on effect. One such knock-on effect has been a 17 percent fall in emergency hospital admissions in Frome.

If you feel a sense of purpose in life, it is much easier to look after yourself. When you feel isolated, you do not feel that your life has any value. You should have something to share with others. It can be wealth, knowledge or skills. Some retired teachers give free tuition to children who cannot afford to pay tutors. It can be a small step in the right direction in a world of increasing loneliness.

Philosophically, loneliness has both a sort of sadness, sorrow and a very deep peace and silence. Everything depends on how you look at it. Most people feel uncomfortable when they begin to live alone. However, unless you live alone you will never be acquainted with your own being. What is more, you will never come to know who you are. When you are always occupied with worldly affairs you begin to live on the surface. If you live on the surface, your relationships cannot have any depth.

Daniel Goleman, of Emotional Intelligence fame, recalls how his own mother grappled with loneliness. She was a retired professor of sociology. Her children were employed in distant places. When her husband died she made a smart move by offering free accommodation to graduate students from her university. She had students from far away countries like Japan, Taiwan and China. One couple had a baby while they were living in her house. The child grew up treating her like her own grandmother. She felt extremely happy with the child and her parents. As a sociologist she made a wise bit of social engineering.

The lesson we have to learn from her is that when you have emotionally supportive relationships your biological stress is very low. However, it may not be wise for you to invite close relatives to live with you. Sometimes such relationships may drive you crazy. It is the paucity of intimate relationships that lead to loneliness. Biologically, the brain’s daily manufacture of new neurons will continue into your old age at a slower rate. According to certain surveys, women appear to be more biologically vulnerable to the ups and downs of life than men.

Psychologically, if you feel lonely, you need social support. University students, who do not have many friends, will feel lonely. This kind of loneliness can be psychologically painful. It can have a negative effect on the immune system. A recent study shows a clear relationship between loneliness and psychological stress. Therefore university students are encouraged to be active in community service, clubs and sports to develop social networks.

People are lonely because they build walls instead of bridges.–  Joseph Fort Newton

Sri Lanka’s vanishing snakes: Scientists warn policy paralysis is driving a silent crisis

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.