Christmas plans that changed

As Father Asiri looked at the congregation before him as he was finishing his sermon on the last Sunday of November, he saw the many different types of persons that formed his parish in which he had spent only two weeks yet.

Having served as an Assistant Parish Priest in two other parishes for three years in each, he had made his plans for the parish he was posted to before he arrived. So, he was ready to announce his first project to the parishioners and announced it after he had completed his sermon.

When he was first welcomed to this new parish, he noticed how ill-maintained the church was. Paint was peeling off walls, the doors and windows looked tired, too, and with the first rains that came down in the very first week of his arrival, the wet floor in many places inside the church told him of the condition of the roof. His appeal therefore was that the parishioners should come forward with financial support to prepare the church for Christmas. In addition, he described a long-term plan for a chapel for the Eucharistic Lord, which is how Father Asiri described the Blessed Sacrament Chapel he had in his mind.

Being a methodical person, he announced that there would be special box kept in the Mission House for those who wish to make contributions in cash and a special book in which others could write the sums of money they wished to contribute later.

While there were quite a few who seemed interested in showing their keenness to make donations that Sunday, Fr. Asiri assessed that the second Sunday after the announcement will be the better day to see what kind of support there was for this, his first project in the new parish.

Since there was hardly any time on the Sunday following, for him to look at the book or count the contributions in the special box, he sat down on Monday to look at the response to his appeal. As far as he was concerned it was as expected, with the monetary contributions being average, the pledges were better. With salary advances to come for some and bonuses in the case of some others, it was very much as expected.

However, the last two entries in the book of pledges were revealing, or even shocking. The difference of pledges was so stark that it was disturbing and they so upset him that it disturbed his sleep that night.

In fact, after seeing the last entry, he could vaguely remember the person who may have written that. A man in a well-worn shirt and a patched sarong who looked like he could do with some help himself.

That night, even as he fell asleep, he could not forget the one million rupee contribution pledged verses the fifty rupee contribution next to that and understandably he did not sleep well and dreamed badly. In the dream that he saw, there stood the church gleaming white with a procession of well-dressed people coming in procession but as they neared the church, the sky turned dark and rain poured down causing the paint to peel off and suddenly in front of the people approaching was a poor man holding a monetary note.

While his normal wake up time was 5.00 a.m., disturbed by the dream and his thoughts, he was up by 3.00 the next morning. Not getting up but remaining in bed he contemplated the reality of the situation revealed through the contributions pledged. In fact, he was determined that he would act on it and not ignore it.

His day was somewhat normal after he decided to visit the person whose contribution was the lowest in the list of would be donors. After breakfast, having looked for the name and address in the book of pledges, he decided to visit the person that morning and not postpone it. Walking along the road he turned further south along the road that bordered the sea beach area and inquiring from a three-wheeler driver, he managed to find the house. It was a shack, a lean to really, with coconut cadjan for walls and roof and as he knocked on a wooden plank that served as a door of that space that was described as John’s house, he was wondering if the visit was a mistake. When John opened the door, his eyes narrowed to adjust to the dim light inside and he observed a bed in one corner on which lay a woman and a few cooking vessels in another corner where there was a hearth with no fire in it.

The welcome from John was a smile in genuine surprise. “Come in Father” he said and pointed to a chair, the only one that was there while he himself kept standing.

In his conversation with John, Father Asiri found out that John was a former carpenter who had given up work after his wife had fallen and broken her leg three years ago, from which she had never fully recovered mostly due to lack of medical care, which in turn was due to the lack of money to take her for treatment. Reduced to charity through a few who was aware of John’s situation, some of whom were those for whom he had done carpentry work on and off John had continued to look after his wife and manage his living without complaining. Though he was tempted to ask why he had pledged the fifty rupees for the church fund, Father did not, as John mentioned that someone had promised to give him money later in the month. This reminded Father of the Gospel story of a widow who put two copper coins in the temple till which earned Jesus’ praise and as he left he allowed John to assume that this was one of his parish visits instead of a special visit prompted by an entry in the church fund book.

The next Sunday, Father’s sermon based on the Gospel of the day was short, but he took time to describe what the Christmas project would be. Having described what he observed in his visit (without mentioning John’s name), his appeal was based on a question, “how can the congregation celebrate Christmas while a fellow parishioner was living in such poor circumstances?” He called for a team of volunteers to study with him how many such “Johns” were in the parish and what could be done. He announced that anyone who was unwilling to allow the funds pledged for the church painting and a chapel for the Blessed Sacrament to be used for a project to help the needy, could do so.

Though he met many of his parishioners after Mass as he normally did, none requested the withdrawal of their contribution.

Thanking God in his prayers that night for opening his eyes to the real needs of the parish, instead of his own perceptions of the needs, Father Asiri knew that Christmas for him and the parishioners will be a better one, a Christmas that would make the people feel that they found room in their hearts to help where help was needed and not allow the “there is no room at the inn” to be the reality of the day.

Psychosocial insights from the birth of Our Lord Jesus for a world striving to uphold the sanctity of human life

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.