Fragile ceasefire stuck in chokepoint

An exchange of fire between the US and Iran in the Strait of Hormuz sent shockwaves across the world yesterday, and oil prices soared as a result. Thankfully, it was a brief clash. The US has claimed that it foiled Iranian attacks on three of its ships. Iran has said it came under unprovoked attacks. Ceasefires in military conflicts are never free from such shocks, and care needs to be exercised to prevent skirmishes from spiraling out of control. The international community has a pivotal role to play in ensuring that the ceasefire in West Asia lasts, and negotiations continue.

The US-Iran peace negotiations have been stuck in the Hormuz chokepoint, and they will have to progress, leading to a durable truce lest the region should face a protracted conflict. There is nary a country that has not been affected by the West Asia conflict either directly or indirectly.

About 1,500-2,000 ships and 20,000 seafarers are reportedly stranded in and around the Hormuz Strait, and this a very serious issue that the world cannot ignore. The US sought to make a naval intervention to escort commercial vessels through the chokepoint, but subsequently paused its “Project Freedom”, which would have jeopardised the fragile ceasefire.

However, so many ships and their crews must not be kept waiting indefinitely in a sea passage, and international navigation via the Hormuz Strait must resume fast but without any US military intervention, which will only make matters worse.

Many economies are reeling the world over, especially in the Global South, owing to the closure of the Hormuz Strait, through which about 20 percent of global oil supplies and about 30 percent of global fertiliser supplies pass. The impact of the destruction of oil assets in Iran and its neighbours will be felt for decades to come. Even if hostilities cease, it will not be possible to repair the damaged assets any time soon.

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has repeatedly warned that prolonged disruption of fertiliser shipments through the Strait of Hormuz could trigger serious global food shortages, food inflation and reduced crop yields, as we pointed out in a previous comment. FAO officials have said that the crisis threatens global agrifood systems because up to 30–45% of internationally traded fertilisers and large volumes of energy supplies move through the strait. This alone is proof of the enormity of the problem the conflict has created for the world.

The general consensus is that a way out is to ensure that the ongoing ceasefire and negotiations create conditions for the return of the status quo ante in the Hormuz Strait soon. However, that will be possible only if both the US and Iran soften their stands. Iran has asked the US to end its naval blockade, and this can be considered a fair demand, and if the US complies, Iran will be compelled to reopen the Hormuz chokepoint, paving the way for further de-escalation and helping bring down oil and fertiliser prices. That alone may not help resolve the conflict, which is far more complex than it looks, but the resumption of international navigation through the Hormuz Strait will give a tremendous boost to the peace process, which is said to be in the doldrums, with both sides resorting to brinkmanship.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.