Chaos at Miss Universe 2025:Winner predecided?

This seems to be a common scene at beauty pageants where there are allegations that the results are fixed.

It is happening here, as well – where beauty pageants are popping up like mushrooms – and I strongly believe the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs should step in and bring some order in the setup here.

I’m told that some of these pageants have turned out to be money-spinners for the organisers, with contestants having to pay huge fees to participate, etc., etc.

Yes, the Miss Universe 2025 pageant, in Thailand, ended in heated controversy after Mexico’s Fátima Bosch was crowned the winner.

According to reports, there were loud protests, inside the venue, with fans chanting “cooking show” in anger over the result; “cooking show,” in pageant slang, means that the crown was “pre-cooked” or predecided—essentially an allegation of a fixed result.

Thailand’s Veena Praveenar Singh finished as first runner-up, while Stephany Abasali of Venezuela was placed second, Ahtisa Manalo of the Philippines came third, and Olivia Yacé of Cote d’lvoire secured fourth place.

The final outcome triggered a wave of frustration from pageant supporters worldwide, many of whom accused the competition of being predetermined, while a former judge claimed the result was prearranged.

Fuel was added to the drama when Omar Harfouch, a Lebanese-French musician, and a Miss Universe 2025 judge, resigned shortly before the final, publicly alleging that Mexico’s victory was orchestrated for business reasons.

Harfouch claimed, on Instagram, that he had already told HBO America (an American premium television network)—a full 24 hours before the final—that Mexico would win. He said this was because Raúl Rocha, the owner of the Miss Universe Organisation, had business ties with Fátima’s father.

He further alleged that Rocha, and his son, contacted him in Dubai to personally ask for his vote, telling him directly that “it will be good for our business.”

Harfouch added that the full details would be exposed in an HBO documentary, scheduled for May 2026.

In the meanwhile, supporters of Fátima Bosch say her coronation was no coincidence, with one fan adding: “Fátima stood out because she is different; she combines beauty with intelligence, strength, and a determination that few possess. She is a woman who cannot be intimidated by anyone, regardless of their power, status, or wealth. She firmly defends her ideas and does so with authenticity, without losing her essence.’’

The fan went on to say that Fátima has something that goes beyond appearances: the ability to inspire.

“She will be the voice of many women and girls around the world, reminding them to speak up, fight for what they believe in, and never settle. And that should make you proud as well, because her courage and strength represent all of us.”

Another fan mentioned that Fátima doesn’t just shine for herself, she shines for those who look at her and find in her an example of courage and dignity, adding that she was a winner from the time she defended herself from the humiliation of Nawat.

“In that situation, natural leadership surfaced in her; an epitome of a peaceful fighter. That’s how she won the hearts of many. Her winning is not measured by how highfaluting her English language is. Let’s face this truth – a case of good karma!’’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.