Intractability of ragging in universities

With reference to the article titled “When Justice steps in: The Supreme Court breaks the Cycle of Ragging Impunity” (The Island – 14.12.2025) by J. A. A. S. Ranasinghe, one is hopeful that finally the government would take effective steps to bring ragging in the universities under control. The onus is on the government to see that the law of the country extends to the universities which didn’t seem to happen in the past. Successive governments are responsible for the continuation of the “Cycle of Ragging Impunity” the writer refers to. I will come to that later. Several raggers were allowed to get away with maim and murder. The law of the country and the penal code are well equipped to deal with verbal and physical harassment, defamation, grievous hurt, torture and murder that may happen in any part of the country which must include the universities.

New anti-ragging laws may have been necessary to deal with the complex situation where witnesses are not readily available due to fear of retaliation and where law enforcement authorities are most unwelcome. As the new laws too have not been implemented effectively the Supreme Court had directed the AG to prepare a new set of guidelines in consultation with universities and law enforcement authorities. These guidelines squarely place the responsibility of dealing with ragging on the shoulders of these authorities. For instance, if a member of the university staff does not report an incident of ragging, he or she is liable to be sanctioned. One hopes these measures would be adequate to effectively bring ragging under control though past experience brings to mind lingering doubt and apprehension.

Ragging in Sri Lankan universities is a well-organized and deeply entrenched project. It has political, sadistic, psychological and socio-economic elements in its aetiology. Rag leaders are appointed well in advance and the plans drawn up before the new entrants’ arrival. Some staff members overtly or covertly support them mainly for political reasons. These factors may have changed with changing politics but ragging is yet a canker in the universities as could be seen in recent incidents though the severity and frequency seem to have abated to a degree. It remains an evil that needs to be rooted out.

Why have the authorities failed in this matter, requiring the Supreme Court intervention? Blame is apportioned on the UGC, university authorities, vice chancellors and the law enforcement authorities. These bodies together constitute a formidable bloc of authority, power and resources. They may have failed to take action or taken it inadequately but where they have been successful in carrying it through, though seldom, subsequently, they were left to face the wrath of the raggers in all its fury more or less alone. Vice chancellors have been under siege in their offices fearing for their lives. UGC similarly attacked, police officers humiliated. Governments too have felt their mutinous rebellion. Universities had to be closed disrupting the studies of innocent students who were the majority. Moreover, police presence was not tolerated by the students and would invariably lead to confrontation which the authorities wanted to avoid. This resulted in a situation where police protection was not readily available to the VCs when under threat.

The few raggers were able to control the student majority by instilling fear by creating a deep sense of dread in them. They would resort to murder, if necessary, to maintain their position of dominance. The submissive students would get on to the streets and march to topple a government when commanded.

The VCs and staff had to live among murderers knowing that police intervention may not be available in an emergency. The governments too did not want the ragging incidents to grow into student rebellion that could be a threat to its own existence. Thus, nobody wanted to take stern action to clamp down on ragging and take the culprits to task. An attempt to do so had the danger of causing a much wider and violent uprising of students involving all the universities. Everybody preferred to soft peddle. Though the UGC had issued clear guidelines these were seldom followed. For instance, though anti-rag committees were appointed as instructed by the UGC these were ineffective in the main. However, university authorities cannot be blamed for all this for the reasons mentioned above. They know that they cannot rely on the higher authorities to back them and take effective action to guarantee their safety.

That is the disgraceful achievement of raggers of the past that the present day raggers have inherited and may strive to emulate though they may not have the power their predecessors seemed to have. As mentioned, this canker must be totally eradicated without a trace if the universities are to be made safe for those seeking entrance. New entrants must be free of apprehension of being harassed in the slightest manner. Brilliant students must not be driven away by this savage menace in the future if our universities are to improve their image.

It is against this background that we have to see how ragging could be stopped. Ragging must absolutely be treated as a police matter and the government must take steps to ensure that the university authorities are fully backed and their safety ensured by effective police involvement whenever necessary. They must have the freedom and authority to summon the police when law and order is breached or their safety is in the slightest danger. Incidence of ragging must be reported to the police and the police must conduct the investigations in a thorough manner. Victims and witnesses must be given the assurance that there will be no retaliation if they come forward to give evidence.

This could be done only if retaliation is dealt with sternly and those responsible are taken to task and penalized according to the law. Raggers must be made to feel that they are not out of reach of the legal arm and any action to silence the witnesses would entail greater punishment.

In the past, police presence on campuses provoked student protests, sometimes violent and this discouraged university authorities and also governments from calling the police in, unless it was absolutely necessary. However, for a university to qualify as a sanctified seat of learning, where presence of police would be an incongruity or even sacrilegious, an idyllic atmosphere must prevail over its precincts. A place where human torture takes place cannot deserve such privileges.

Legal cases against raggers must be heard and completed promptly and punishment meted out without delay and there should not be sympathy or leniency. Student protests against legal action should not be tolerated and should be clamped down with vigour. Police presence must remain until normalcy returns.

Furthermore, preemptive action could be taken by seeking out the rag leaders and finding evidence about their activities and plans regarding organization of ragging. These activities could be made punishable by law, in the same way that crime is preempted by punishing the plotters. The CID may have to get involved in carrying out this aspect of the project.

As mentioned at the beginning of this note, the onus is on the government to see that ragging in the universities is completely eradicated. It cannot be done without the greater involvement of the police including the CID in order to ensure the safety of the university authorities, staff and particularly the witnesses and also to target the rag leaders. Without strong government backing and support the universities and the law enforcement authorities alone cannot achieve this goal.

Why the Proposed Amendments to Sri Lanka’s Universities Act Raise Fears of Authoritarianism, Democratic Backsliding, and a Dangerous Precedent for Academic Freedom

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.