Australia supports disaster preparedness with rescue boats, disaster assessment drones

The Australian Government today handed over two rescue inflatable boats to the Disaster Management Centre (DMC), with disaster assessment drones for the National Building Research Institute (NBRI) to follow, as part of Australia’s ongoing support for Sri Lanka’s disaster risk management eff orts.

Funded by the Australian Government and procured by UNOPS, the equipment will support national disaster preparedness and emergency response efforts as part of Australia’s AUD 7 million humanitarian and recovery package.

The two rescue inflatable boats will enhance the Disaster Management Centre’s operational capability to reach communities isolated by floods and other water-related emergencies. They will support emergency evacuations, medical transport, the delivery of relief supplies and rapid access to affected areas during emergencies and recovery eff orts.

The disaster assessment drones will provide the National Building Research Institute with rapid aerial assessment and monitoring capacity in disaster-affected areas. The drones will support damage assessments of roads, bridges, embankments and settlements, improve situational awareness, enhance responder safety and provide information to support evidence-based decision-making during disaster response and recovery.

Hosted by the Disaster Management Centre in Colombo, the ceremony was attended by Australia’s Special Envoy for Indian Ocean Affairs Tim Watts MP, at the Australian High Commission Chargé d’Affaires Ruth Baird, Disaster Management Centre Director General Major General Sampath Kotuwegoda, National Building Research Institute Acting Director General Dr. H. A. G. Jayathissa, UNOPS South Asia Multi-Country Office Head of Support Services Maki Rankoe, and representatives from the Australian High Commission, UNOPS, the Disaster Management Centre and the National Building Research Institute.

Australia’s Special Envoy for Indian Ocean Affairs Tim Watts MP said: “Australia is committed to locally-led disaster preparedness and regional resilience in the Indian Ocean. The Australian-funded rescue boats and disaster assessment drones will help strengthen Sri Lanka’s disaster preparedness and emergency response capability.”