US-Iran to sign a ‘peace deal’ on Friday

Aljazeera - Iran and the United States have agreed to a memorandum of understanding to end more than 100 days of war, with Tehran saying the agreement includes Lebanon, which has been under intense Israeli attacks since March 2.

Mediated by Pakistan and Qatar, the deal will be formally signed in the Swiss city of Geneva on Friday.

US President Donald Trump said the Strait of Hormuz, which has been under a de facto Iranian blockade, will open to all shipping on Friday, while Tehran said the US naval blockade on its ports will be lifted immediately.

The war, which triggered a global energy crisis, erupted after the US and Israel launched attacks on Iran on February 28 amid talks over Tehran’s nuclear programme.

Here is what we know about the US-Iran deal, as well as reactions from the parties involved.

The secretariat of Iran’s Supreme National Security Council said on Monday that the deal with the US includes the immediate suspension of hostilities on all fronts.

“Based on the agreements reached, the war and military operations on all fronts, including Lebanon, will end immediately and permanently as of tonight, and in addition, the naval blockade against Iran will end immediately and completely,” it said in a statement.

“The signing of this Memorandum of Understanding will be officially held on Friday, June 19,” it added.

“Negotiations for a final agreement will be postponed until after the other party has fulfilled its obligations under the Memorandum of Understanding. The Islamic Republic of Iran appreciates the efforts of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the Government of Qatar. Peace be upon you, God’s mercy and blessing.”

Announcing the memorandum of understanding (MOU), US President Trump said the deal will bring peace and security to the whole region.

“The Deal with the Islamic Republic of Iran is now complete. Congratulations to all! I hereby fully authorize the toll free opening of the Strait of Hormuz, and, simultaneously herewith, authorize the immediate removal of the United States Naval blockade. Ships of the World, start your engines. Let the oil flow!” he said in a post on his Truth Social platform.

US Vice President JD Vance said the newly announced ceasefire could usher in a “new era” for the Middle East. He credited Trump’s diplomacy with Gulf countries and other regional partners for helping bring about the deal.

“What the president has done is create the real space to transform that region,” Vance said in an interview with Fox News. “And now, hopefully, a new era with the Iranians.”

Vance also reiterated what he described as a central US objective, saying: “I think we can safely say, with confidence, that Iran will never have a nuclear weapon.”

Earlier, Kazem Gharibabadi, Iran’s deputy foreign minister for legal and international affairs, confirmed that an end to military operations was expected “soon”.

According to remarks carried by Iran’s Tasnim news agency, Gharibabadi said an “immediate and permanent end to the war and military operations on various fronts, including Lebanon”, would be announced starting Monday.

He added that negotiations on a final agreement would take place during 60 days, contingent on Iran verifying that the US had fulfilled its commitments. The commitments include ending hostilities, lifting the naval blockade, and releasing frozen Iranian assets.

Pakistani Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif, whose country has been mediating indirect talks between Tehran and Washington, broke the news on X on Sunday.

Sharif said a “permanent termination of military operations on all fronts” had been agreed upon, including in Lebanon.

According to the Iranian news agency Mehr, the draft agreement contains 14 points.

It includes: A permanent and immediate cessation of hostilities on all fronts, including Lebanon; the complete lifting of the naval blockade within 30 days; a US commitment to withdraw its forces from around Iran; and the reopening of the Strait of Hormuz.

The draft also mentions the suspension of sanctions on oil sales, reaching a final agreement on nuclear issues within 60 days of signing the deal, and the release of $24bn in frozen Iranian assets during the 60-day negotiation period.

Mehr also reported that final negotiations would not begin until half of Iran’s frozen assets had been released and restrictions affecting the Strait of Hormuz had been lifted.

Discussions concerning Iran’s missile programme and its support for resistance groups have been removed from the negotiating agenda, it added.

Al Jazeera could not independently confirm the details reported by Mehr.

Pakistan, along with Qatar, has been a key mediator in the ceasefire agreement and was involved in the last-minute talks before the deal was announced.

Sharif said on Sunday that a US-Iran agreement had been reached and that mediators would facilitate a series of meetings this week. He added that both sides had declared the “immediate and permanent termination of military operations on all fronts, including in Lebanon”.

The prime minister thanked the US and Iran for their commitment, as well as Qatar for its support “in reaching this agreement”.

“I would also especially thank the visionary leadership of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Republic of Turkiye for their immense contributions in this regard,” he added.

A series of meetings will follow this week to lay the foundation for technical talks and the official signing ceremony, he said.

Qatar’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs also issued a statement, welcoming “the agreement reached on the Memorandum of Understanding” between the US and Iran on “addressing the outstanding issues between them”.

The ministry added that it viewed the agreement, including the opening of the Strait of Hormuz, as an “important step” towards consolidating sustainable peace and promoting economic growth, regionally and internationally.

Qatari Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al Thani also praised Pakistan and “all regional and international parties who contributed to creating the conditions for reaching this understanding”.

The Iranian Embassy in Turkiye posted an image on its official X account of an Iranian flag planted on a rock motif over the Strait of Hormuz.