Tender Boards, Katunayake runway and the day an OA asked JRJ to “go to hell”

Among the numerous responsibilities that Secretaries have to discharge, is the one of being Members or Chairmen of various Tender Boards. In fact most senior public servants are faced with this duty. But in the case of Secretaries, in addition to their own Ministry Tender Boards, above a certain financial threshold, they are appointed to large and important ones of other Ministries by the Cabinet. In my case, I kept on being appointed to some of the largest and most difficult ones. Some of these were controversial, where previous tenders had been canceled and fresh tenders ordered, due to allegations and other controversies.

Usually I was given the added burden of chairing these controversial boards. This happened under several governments. Perhaps, the fact that I chaired the Food Purchase Board of the Ministry of Food, which was responsible for the purchase of food commodities, of the order of about Rs. 5 billion a year, for a period of over 12 years without any problem or complaint, might have had something to do with this. In government, if you have been deemed to have worked well, additional burdens are cast on you, but no additional remuneration. All governments generously reward you with more work and additional responsibilities.

Most of the Tender Boards I was appointed to involved financial outlays of well over a billion rupees. Two of the more interesting and even controversial ones were the Hydrocracker tender of the Petroleum Corporation and the new Katunayake Airport runway. In the first tender the Ministry of Industries was involved, and in the second, the Ministry of Defence. I will not dwell at length on the Hydrocracker tender, which was dogged with fierce competition and numerous allegations, among the competitors as well as against various persons in the Ministry and the Corporation. The Hydrocracker was meant to upgrade the technology of the Petroleum refinery making the operation capable of new products, as well as bringing about cost savings and greater efficiency.

In the end, fierce battles among competitors and unremitting allegations led to government canceling the whole tender. Matters did not rest there, and some of the parties who thought they had a grievance went to court. The High Court judgment whilst being complimentary of the “Three civil servants,” who served on the Tender Board, namely Mr. V.L. Wirasinghe, Secretary, Ministry of Industries; Mr. Chandi Chanmugam, Deputy Secretary to the Treasury and myself, as Secretary to the Ministry of Food and Co-operatives, was very critical of several persons in the Ministry and the Petroleum Corporation, including the then Minister of Industries. The net result of all this was that we lost an opportunity to modernize and add to the effectiveness of the petroleum refinery.

In September 1983, I found myself appointed by the Cabinet to be a Member of the Katunayake Airport New Runway Tender Board. Since the airport came under the Ministry of Defence, General SepalsaAttygalle Secretary, Ministry of Defence, who was also the Chairman of the Airport and Aviation Authority, chaired the Board. Other members of the Board were Mr. Gaya Cumaranatunge, Deputy Secretary to the Treasury and the Director of Highways, an engineer. There was a technical evaluation committee composed of senior engineers and there was also a foreign firm of consultants to the project.

Tenders of these magnitudes, involve several volumes of material and drawings. You took all these at home because there was no time whatsoever to read and digest these in office. I used to heap them by my bed, where propping myself on a pillow, I used to read them in the night and over week-ends. This used to get me into trouble with my wife, the “Home Minister,” who was unable to get the room dusted and swept properly and was faced with the task of daily shifting these volumes about. A frequent inquiry was, “When are you going to take them away?” to which my consistently useless answer was, “When the Tender Board has finished business.”

The Tender Board usually met in the premises of the Airport and Aviation Authority in Havelock Town, and sometimes in the Ministry of Defence. From the very beginning we had problems. One was the inability of the Chairman of the Board, General Attygalle to sit and concentrate on what was going on. This was because he was being constantly disturbed by the telephone. I should say telephones, because like most of us he had more than one. He used to say “You carry on,” and became preoccupied with his calls. Therefore, it was difficult for him to follow the discussions closely or get a coherent picture of what was happening.

The other problem we faced was that a good part of the content of our discussions was leaking out. Another problem that arose as we went on with our meetings, was that various influential people tried to interfere with the working of the Tender Board. This was going too far, and Mr. Cumaranatunge and I sought an appointment with President Jayewardene in his capacity as Minister of Defence, the Minister in charge of the Airport. He gave us an appointment at his home at Ward Place. We told him that we were concerned about the leaks as well as attempts to influence us, and that we thought that he should know of these as the Minister in charge.

He noted what we said, affirmed his confidence in us and asked us to act fearlessly. Things improved somewhat. The fact that we saw the President would have been subsequently known. When these things were happening, I kept my Minister Mr. Gamani Jayasuriya informed, in confidence. He was a senior Minister and a gentleman, and I wanted him to be aware of what was happening.

As we went deeper into the technical aspects of the offers, Mr. Cumaranatunge and I became concerned about three areas in particular. One was, whether the parking apron facilities were adequate. The other was, as to whether the amount of concrete going into the runway was adequate due to the high water table in the area of the airport. Actually I raised this issue since I was familiar with the Negombo area, and after having noticed that the tenderer who was emerging had constructed runways only in certain areas of the Middle-East, under desert or near desert conditions. But what worried us most was the question of the length of the runway.

The two of us who were non-engineers and could be classed as non-technical developed an uneasy feeling as we went on. We were not fully satisfied that the length of the runway as recommended by all the technical experts, including the foreign consultants, was capable of taking a 747 aircraft. Mr. Cumaranatunge and I discussed these matters in private. In due course, an agreement was reached that the apron area needed to be expanded and that indeed more concrete had to be added to the runway. This was a result achieved as a result of our educated instincts which we followed up which led to private consultations with friends of ours who were technically competent.

On the length of the runway however all the experts were adamant that the length was right and that an extension beyond the length recommended would only add substantially to the costs, for no purpose. But our instincts would not go away. The more we read and the more we discussed, the more disturbed the two of us became. It was true that we were not experts in these areas. But by now Mr. Cumaranatunge and I were quite senior in service had sat on scores of different types of tender boards, and possessed wide and varied experience. We had got into the discipline of taking nothing for granted and the habit of probing anything of importance. We had also had enough experience not to uncritically trust “experts,” because during the course of our careers, we had seen experts of all kinds being either wrong or not fully right. Therefore, we decided to seek international assistance on our own, unknown to the rest of the tender board or the technical evaluation committee.

We were suspicious of the behaviour of some of them, and not certain that they were not in the pockets of some of the tenderers. We used Mr. Cumaranatunge’s Treasury telex facilities and contacted the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) in Montreal, Canada. There were no fax machines at the time.

We relayed our concerns to them and the reasons for our state of mind. The reply that came was startling. ICAO doubted that given our conditions, the runway was adequate to take a 747 aircraft. In the meantime, in reply to our continuing probing, the experts cited an example of a runway in Indonesia, which was similar to the intended length of our runway. The next day unknown to others, Mr. Cumaranatunge and I telexed the Director of Civil Aviation of Indonesia. We received another startling reply. He replied that the runway in question could comfortably take in D.C. 10 aircraft and a 747, “in an emergency!”

By this time we were getting quite angry. We demanded that a special meeting of the tender board be summoned, along with the technical evaluation committee and the foreign consultants to the project who were from a Western country. I kept Minister Gamani Jayasuriya informed of all this in confidence, in case something came up in Cabinet. At the special meeting Mr. Cumaranatunge produced the relevant telexes and pitched into all the experts, domestic and foreign. He was quite harsh and demanded answers. I backed him up.

My personality and style were different to his. In a calm and collected manner, natural to me, I supplemented what Mr. Cumaranatunge said, mentioned that unless cogent explanations were given we had to assume incompetence or worse, and that both of us would if necessary ask to be relieved of our duty in serving on such a tender board. There were red faces all-round. The evidence we had, proved to be irrefutable. The consultants accepted that they had erred. The technical evaluation committee were speechless. We saw to it that all this was recorded in the minutes. The net result was that several meters were added to the original length of the runway.

In the meantime, we heard that some interested parties had got at some cabinet ministers. Mr. Cumaranatunge was out of the country. But I decided, I needed to see the President. I got an appointment and went to see him in the Presidential Secretariat in the old Parliament building. The main issue was that a tenderer who had been ruled out by the tender board on the basis of non responsiveness to some of the conditions was exerting considerable pressure to join in the bidding. This tender was from an important western country and the bidding organization quite well known. But as far as we were concerned we had to safeguard the integrity of the tender process and names did not matter to us.

Our decisions had to be transparent, consistent and manifestly defensible. When I was ushered into the President’s presence, he was seated alone at his office desk. As I was walking in, he smiled and asked “So Pieris, are you worried?” I said “Yes Sir,” and sat in the chair indicated by him. Then, I briefly indicated what was happening, the pressure that was coming, and the rumour that some cabinet ministers were getting involved. After listening, he said “Yes a minister has spoken to me about this matter.” After a pause, he added “why don’t you prepare a short note for me on this for cabinet? You can send it to me.” I said, “Sir, I cannot make the note too short. If I compress too much, cabinet will not understand. Certain technical issues will have to be explained.”

“How many pages will it be?” he inquired. “At least five pages” I said, thinking that, no one will read it. “Ah! My ministers won’t read it then” said the President, plucking the very thought from my mind. “I will tell you,” he went on. “Come to the next cabinet meeting and explain it to them.” I thought “Serves you right for trying to be too conscientious.” At the same time, during the absence of Mr. Cumaranatunge also, I did not want matters to get out of hand.

I went before cabinet on the appointed day. True to my previous experiences, the cabinet seemed to be in an uproar, as I entered. I have been called into cabinet on several occasions, and under several governments. At least whenever I had gone in, they always had sounded like a public meeting gone out of hand. When silence prevailed, after the intervention of the President, I was asked by the President to explain matters. Some ministers interrupted me to ask questions; some asked questions at the end. These included Ministers Lalith Athulathmudali, Gamini Dissanayake and Anandatissa de Alwis. One asked a question which indicated that the minister concerned had not understood a word of what I had said.

At the end of it I remember the Minister of Finance, Mr.Ronnie de Mel addressing the President for all to hear, and saying “Sir, the Tender Board seem to be doing an excellent job. I don’t think we should interfere with them. Let them take their own decisions.” Some of the ministers strongly supported this. In the end, I was thanked and asked to carry on as we thought fit. There was a cabinet decision to this effect.

About three days after this cabinet meeting, my telephone at home rang at about 7.30 a.m. It was President Jayewardene. “Pieris, I have a problem with keeping out that party,” he said Then he went on to explain what the problem was. It was plain from what he said, that high matters of state were involved, which transcended a mere single tender. The President however understood our position as public servants. He said at the end “what’s to be done,? shall I then give you a directive to admit this party for consideration? It will be enough if their offer is considered.”

I saw that there was a genuine problem. Now I had to advice him. I reminded him that it was the cabinet that ratified our decision to keep the party out and advised that it would be better for the cabinet to change the decision rather than he alone getting involved. He thanked me and said he would abide by my advice. In the end, although admitted to the running, the party concerned was not successful, and the tender was awarded to the correct party with all matters such as the length of the runway settled. There were no protests.

There was an interesting postscript to all this. After the runway was built and completed sometime in 1986, Minister Gamani Jayasuriya and I had to go to Washington. We were going through the VIP lounge, and when the officers came to collect our baggage and air tickets, I quietly whispered to the protocol officer to put me on the opposite side from the Minister. I thought this was the best way to obtain some privacy for both of us on a long journey. But as they were leaving with the tickets, the minister pointed to me and said “Put that fellow next to me,” in his usual humorous and bantering style. That was that, and I found myself seated next to him.

The minister was quite relaxed and very jovial. When the stewardess came round for the drinks order and I said pineapple juice, the Minister told her “What pineapple juice, bring him a Cinzano.” In a short while the plane was taxing for take off. This was the first time both of us were going to get a glimpse of the new runway, for it was opened to traffic only a few weeks previously. I was gazing out, lost in thought when the plane took the turn and began straightening and we began to see the runway. The next moment a heavy hand descended on my shoulder, and when I turned somewhat startled, the minister pointed at the runway and said “Your runway.”

I had referred earlier to President Jayewardene’s telephone call to me at home. He very often dialed a line himself and many a startled official found the President on the line when he lifted the phone. I myself have had this experience on several occasions. One day for instance when I went to answer the phone at about 10 p.m. at home, it was the President on the line. There was no switchboard operator asking you to hold on. I rather think that he enjoyed the effect of surprise it created in people.

But one day we saw that the creation of surprise need not be one way. We were summoned to an 8.00 a.m. meeting with the President in the conference room of the then Presidential Secretariat at Republic Square. It was on some issues connected with Agriculture and Food. Minister Gamani Jayasuriya was there with senior officials from both Ministries. During the course of the discussions it became evident that we needed a senior official from the Ministry of Finance. The President reached out for the telephone directory which was near his telephone at the conference table and began leafing through muttering “I will get Dr. Tilakaratna, and ask him to come here.”

Dr. Tilakaratna was at that time the Secretary to the Treasury. Mr. Menikdiwela, the President’s Secretary, who was seated close by volunteered to find the number, but the President said “Don’t worry, I will find it.” He found the number and dialed. It appeared that there was no answer. It was still not 8.30 a.m. and Dr. Tilakaratna had not come in as yet. Then the President said, “I will try the Senior Assistant Secretary,” which must have been the next officer on which his eye alighted. No answer. Then looking further down his face lit up and he said “Ah the OA” and began dialing the Office Assistant’s number.

This time he got a response. “Is that the OA?’ asked the President. The answer must have been in the affirmative, for he said “OA I am President Jayewardene here.” We knew that he was asking for trouble, and were suppressing our laughter with great difficulty. As expected, a peculiar look developed on the President’s face, and he slowly replaced the receiver, telling us “The OA says, – “I say, I have heard that before. Why don’t you go to hell without disturbing me?!” We were literally rolling with laughter. We could see that the President enjoyed it too.

Eventually Dr. Tilakaratna was got down. The President told him “I say, you have a very strong OA He had just asked me to go to hell.” There was more laughter. Dr. Tilakaratna said, “When I go back to office, I will call and ask him.” We told him that if the poor man had a weak heart, it would surely kill him. But he thought that the OA was robust enough to take any shock. The meeting ended after some time. Later, we asked Dr. Tilakaratna as to what happened. He had called the OA up and calmly asked him “OA is it true that, you have this morning asked the President of Sri Lanka to go to hell?!” I would leave the hapless man’s reaction to the reader’s imagination.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pie

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.