Dialog Schools Rugby Isipathana - Trinity Blockbuster at the Park

May.22 (Mirror Sports) - Two of the leading rugbyplaying schools in the island, defending champions Trinity and highly ranked Isipathana, will take the field to decide who tops Group A of the Dialog Schools Rugby League Tournament when they clash at Havelock Park Sunday, with kick-off set for 4.15 p.m.

The two teams have remained unbeaten, having won all four matches they have played, and supporters of both sides can certainly look forward to rugby at its best.

Previous clashes between the sides have ended in mouth-watering finishes, with last year’s knockout final at the same venue turning out to be a blockbuster as the Pathanas prevailed in a closely contested affair with a 12-9 victory.

However, this time it is completely different, as the Lions have vastly improved and lived up to their reputation by playing fast, open rugby and dismantling opponents with ease, which was evident in this year’s knockout final against Royal, whom they defeated comfortably.

The teams will enter the field full of confidence, with Trinity led by full-back Shan Althaf, who has been their anchor, guiding them to victories against Lumbini MV (55-12), St Anthony’s (58-5), Sri Sumangala (39- 0) and DSS (41-10).

Meanwhile, Isipathana, led by No. 8 Shaakib Zumri, have also recorded impressive wins against St Anthony’s (43-14), DSS (35-10), Lumbini MV (33-6) and Sri Sumangala (40-12). Past performances, however, may count for little as the two sides battle for supremacy, and it remains to be seen what the ultimate outcome will be.

The two sides are overflowing with talent and it is not easy to predict who will emerge victorious, as both teams appear evenly balanced based on current form.

Looking at the resources available to both teams, Trinity skipper Althaf will be one of the players their opponents need to closely monitor. Althaf has a strong supporting cast, including No. 8 Achintha Jayasena, wingers Dimath Ambepitiya and Amaar Faizal, fly-half Abdul Malik, flankers Nisith Kumarasinghe and Hanza Abdeen, scrum-half Udan Wijekoon, and second-row players Evin Jayasena and Akash Fernando, all of whom have played key roles in the Lions’ success.

On the other hand, Isipathana skipper Shaakib also has quality players at his disposal, including full-back Nimantha Sandeepa, who has been in excellent form, prop forward Nevitha Mewnaka, fly-half Thenula de Costa, centre Yuvindu Kodituwakku, flanker Senuja Jayaweera, along with Rizmi Jaffad, Dilum Sandeeptha and Abdul Azeez.

As mentioned, with both teams battling for the top spot, the match is undoubtedly expected to be a thriller, and with quality players on either side, it could be anybody’s game. For the record, the two sides have been facing each other since 1963, and this will be their 41st meeting.

Isipathana lead the overall tally with 20 wins to Trinity’s 16, while four matches have ended in draws.