Ocean Lanka marks 30 years in apparel industry

Ocean Lanka (Pvt) Ltd, a weft knitted fabric manufacture, marks its 30th anniversary this year. Since its establishment in 1996, the company has evolved alongside Sri Lanka’s apparel industry, continuously strengthening its manufacturing capabilities and building long-standing relationships with customers, partners and stakeholders.  Over three decades, the company has navigated changing global market conditions, technological advancements and evolving customer expectations, while maintaining a strong focus on quality, reliability and continuous improvement. Innovation has remained an important pillar of this journey. Through continued investment in research and development, product innovation, technology and operational excellence, Ocean Lanka has strengthened its ability to develop functional and performancedriven fabric solutions for increasingly sophisticated global requirements. Its work in textile research and commercialisation has also received national recognition, reinforcing the company’s ambition to compete through innovation and greater value creation.

Commenting on the milestone, Andrew Yau, Chairman of Ocean Lanka said, “Thirty years is an important milestone for Ocean Lanka, but it is also an opportunity to look towards what comes next. As our industry continues to evolve, our future will depend on our ability to innovate, embrace technology, operate more sustainably and create greater value for our customers. We have built a strong foundation over the past three decades, and we are committed to building an even stronger and more futureready Ocean Lanka.” To commemorate its 30th anniversary, Ocean Lanka organised a series of meaningful activities reflecting gratitude for its journey and optimism for the future. The anniversary was also marked with a Pirith chanting ceremony and an almsgiving offered to 30 members of the Maha Sangha, providing an opportunity to reflect on the company’s threedecade journey with gratitude and invoke blessings for its people and continued progress. As Ocean Lanka enters its fourth decade, its focus is firmly on the future. With the global textile and apparel industry being reshaped by technology, sustainability and growing demand for innovative and highperformance materials, the company intends to further strengthen its research and development capabilities, expand its highervalue product portfolio, embrace advanced manufacturing technologies and advance responsible manufacturing practices.