Police reveal charges against ‘Bus Lalith’ after Dubai repatriation

Colombo, Aug. 25 (Daily Mirror) - Police today revealed the charges against Lalith Kannangara, alias “Bus Lalith,” following his repatriation from Dubai, where he had been hiding under Interpol Red Notice, with the suspect wanted in connection with multiple cases of murder, attempted murder, drug trafficking, extortion, arson and serious assault.

A team of officers led by the Director of the Central Crime Investigation Bureau (CCIB) escorted the 36-year-old suspect, who arrived in Sri Lanka in the early hours of August 25.

Kannangara, a resident of Kalutara South, is wanted in connection with a series of serious offences reported across several police divisions, including murder, attempted murder, assault, extortion, arson and firearms-related offences.

According to police records, he is accused of assaulting and injuring a person with a sharp weapon in the Hanwella Police area in September 2013.

He is also wanted in connection with an incident in 2021 in which a business premises in Neluwathuduwa was allegedly broken into and a lorry was set on fire. In another incident that year, he allegedly opened fire near a businessman’s residence after extortion demands were refused, seriously injuring the victim.

Police said Kannangara is further wanted over an October 2022 incident in which three people were allegedly attacked and seriously injured after a group forcibly entered a house in the Hanwella Police area.

He is also accused of aiding, abetting and conspiring in the fatal shooting of a person on Cross Street, Hanwella, on December 18, 2022. The case is currently before the Homagama/Awissawella Magistrate’s Court.

Police records also link him to the double shooting murder of two people in the Padukka Police area on December 25, 2023, and the fatal shooting of another person in the Hanwella area on March 4, 2024.

He is also wanted in connection with the shooting and murder of a businessman residing in Neluwathuduwa on September 30, 2024.

In 2025, Kannangara allegedly opened fire at three people travelling in a three-wheeler in the Kosgama Police area, injuring them. Police also accuse him of supplying a T-56 assault rifle and 25 rounds of ammunition to a person arrested near a nightclub in Kollupitiya in July 2025.

He is further accused of directing the fatal shooting of a former Pradeshiya Sabha member who was travelling on a motorcycle in the Meegoda Police area on August 12, 2025. The following day, a firearm was allegedly discharged into the air on Muthuhena Road in the Meegoda area before the suspects fled.

Police Media Spokesperson and Assistant Superintendent of Police F.U. Wootler said the arrest followed special intelligence received by the Inspector General of Police on October 25, 2025.

The suspect is currently in the custody of the Central Crime Investigation Bureau for further investigations. Police said inquiries will also focus on his alleged involvement in drug trafficking, other organised criminal activities and properties suspected to have been acquired through illegal means.

The Illegal Assets Investigation Unit has launched a separate investigation into the suspect’s assets.

ASP Wootler said that since 2024, police have repatriated 42 suspects against whom Interpol Red Notices had been issued. Steps are also being taken to bring back a further 109 individuals wanted under Red Notices.

In addition, 38 suspects who did not have Red Notices have been repatriated, with several more expected to be brought back in the coming days.

Police also said action has been taken over the past three years to confiscate illicitly acquired assets valued at approximately Rs. 3.878 billion.

Of this amount, assets worth Rs. 1.549 billion were fully vested in the State in 2024, while a further Rs. 1.549 billion was processed in 2025. Initial steps have been taken to confiscate assets worth Rs. 839 million during the early months of 2026.