Venerable Denmārkaye Mettāvihāri Mahā Thera

It was only a few months back, on July 27, 2025, to be precise, that a letter was prepared and handed over to Venerable Mettâvihâri Mahâ Thera by Most Venerable Tirikunamale Ananda Mahanayaka Thera recommending a short respite in Denmark. This was when Ven. Mettâvihâri Mahâ Thera expressed his wish to return to Denmark for treatment.

I have known late Ven. Mettâvihâri for over four decades when both of us were laymen and have even visited the beautiful house he built with his spouse, a Sri Lankan. who by profession was an architect. It was a storied building near Asokârâma temple, facing Havelock Road, Colombo 5, and the rooftop of their house was a beautiful garden open to the skies. That was my first experience of a rooftop garden, which was not a very common sight those days.

Ven. Mettâvihâri’s lay name was Joergen Jacob Sylvest Jakobsen. His parents, Helmer and Dagmar, had five children and Jacob was the second in his family. Born on February 21, 1945, he came to Sri Lanka in 1969 when he was 24 years of age. Before long he got married and led a fruitful married life with his Sri Lankan wife for 18 years, after which both decided to renounce worldly life and devote their lives to the Dhamma. In 1988 he received ordination with the Most Ven Madihe Pannasiha Mahanayaka Thera as preceptor and Ven. Ampitiye Sri Rahula Maha Thera as teacher; and so was his spouse.

He was a very pious, unassuming monk and it was a common sight to see him walking barefoot on a tarred road from the Narada Centre, at Sarana Road off Bauddhaloka Mawatha, where he later chose to reside. He was a computer expert and he profitably used his computer knowledge in good stead within the resources he had. I was a lay person then and was a frequent visitor to the Narada Centre to assist him in his work. I like to mention with gratitude that I was initiated to using email and to the computer world by him.

Venerable Mettâvihâri used his vast computer knowledge to spread the Dhamma. That was very much before the many TV stations that are prevalent today as Buddhist channels. He was the founder of Dharmavâhini Foundation for spreading the sublime Dhamma and acted as its Patron. Almost all the work pertaining to it was done by him single-handed but he never liked to get credit. Sometimes it was difficult to work with him because of his abstemious ways. Many things that were taken for granted was disapproved by him. Because of this internal disciplining he was an enthusiast and promoter of Free and Opensource Software and Linux. He disdained using “pirated” software.

A very valuable contribution of his was the digitalizing of the Tipitaka, the Pali Canon, on the initiative of Most Venerable Madihe Pannasiha Mahanayaka Thera, his preceptor. The Tipitaka is available for free download in three languages from his website metta.lk. One of his close Dhamma friends was late Venerable Dhammavihari Maha Thera, who was Professor of Pali and Buddhist Studies and one-time Editor of the Buddhist Encyclopaedia. They were both resident monks of the Narada Centre that was once called the Buddhist Information and Research Centre under the directorship of Ven. Dhammavihâri Maha Thera. Ven. Mettâvihâri assisted him in the preparation and production of the second edition of Buddhist Monastic Discipline authored by Ven. Dhammavihari. His heart was always open to help others and he was ever ready to use his technological know-how in the service of the Dhamma.

He was responsible to bring down many a time the most famous Meditation Master Most Venerable Brahmavaṃsa Maha Thero and his pupil Ven. Brahmâli Maha Thero to Sri Lanka to conduct 10-day meditation retreats. A special Brahmavamsa Society was formed of which he was the Patron. After organising a programme, Ven. Mettâvihâri used to come to Vajiraramaya either walking or by bus and in his fluent Sinhala encourages all bhikkhus including the Mahanayaka Thera to participate in those retreats. Many participated because of his enthusiasm. He had a very pleasant and mild way of speaking and even a refusal was accepted with a smile and somewhat jokingly with his right hand placed over his mouth

With birth follows ageing and final death. He was 80 years of age when he passed away. He could have lived longer but for his illness. Of this, the years he spent in Sri Lanka were more than he lived in his home country. For the services rendered by him it would have been most fitting for him to be granted distinguished citizenship. But I understand that his application for citizenship was rejected. However, his personality was such that he did not bear any grudge and continued with his noble work with all humility.

His death is a reminder that all we do are temporary and fleeting in the long run. Death is inevitable but when, where or how is unpredictable. Venerable Mettâvihâri is no more but he lives in the minds of all who closely associated with this noble person. May his sojourn in Sansara be short because of the merit accrued by him and may he attain the bliss of Nibbana according to his wishes.

“When Justice Steps In: The Supreme Court Breaks the Cycle of Ragging Impunity”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.