UNFPA and Sri Lanka Parliament partner to build a more inclusive future

The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Parliament of Sri Lanka have signed a Memorandum of Understanding to strengthen the use of population data and evidence in policymaking, reinforcing a shared commitment to ensuring that the country’s changing population dynamics are reflected in future legislation and national development priorities. The MoU was signed between Secretary-General of Parliament Kushani Anusha Rohanadeera and UNFPA Sri Lanka Representative a.i., Phuntsho Wangyel.

The partnership will help ensure that the laws and policies shaping Sri Lanka’s future are informed by reliable population data and evidence, enabling the country to respond more effectively to population ageing, changing family structures and evolving development needs while advancing gender equality and protecting the health and rights of women and young people.

UNFPA Regional Director ad interim for Asia and the Pacific Dr. Aleksandar (Sasha) Bodiroza said: “The decisions made today will shape the lives of future generations. This partnership is about ensuring that Parliament has the evidence, data and insights needed to build policies that respond to a changing population while protecting people’s rights, expanding opportunities and ensuring that no one is left behind. Demographic change is not something to fear. It is an opportunity to build a stronger, more inclusive future if we prepare for it together.”

The agreement was a key milestone during Dr. Bodiroza’s official visit to Sri Lanka from 28 June to 4 July, focused on strengthening partnerships to support the country’s long-term development priorities.

During his visit, Dr. Bodiroza also met with Prime Minister, Dr. Harini Amarasuriya; Speaker of Parliament, Dr. Jagath Wickramaratne; and Health and Mass Media Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa and Secretary to the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs, W. M. D. T. Wickremasinghe. Discussions focused on strengthening health systems, advancing gender equality, supporting women and young people and preparing for Sri Lanka’s changing population landscape through evidence-based, rights-centred policies.

Dr. Bodiroza also visited communities affected by Cyclone Ditwah to observe UNFPA’s ongoing interventions to support women and girls in estate communities through reproductive healthcare, protection services and humanitarian assistance. Additional engagements with development partners, civil society organizations and the private sector reinforced the importance of broad partnerships in advancing inclusive development and ensuring that women, girls and young people can fully participate in Sri Lanka’s future.