A knotty legal issue

The JVP-led NPP government has apparently taken a leaf out of its immediate predecessor’s book, where election postponements are concerned. It has said the much-delayed Provincial Council (PC) elections will be held only after the completion of the delimitation process, which is a prerequisite for the implementation of the mixed proportional system.

The Election Commission (EC) is reported to have said the completion of the delimitation process will take about one year. The NPP is losing cooperative society elections, which are considered political windsocks, and therefore the government will try every trick in the book to delay the PC polls as long as possible.

The postponement of PC elections was widely considered a political issue, and it was thought that the most effective way to sort it out was to crank up pressure on the government, but former EC Chairman Mahinda Deshapriya has shed light on a legal dimension of the problem.

He has said the Governors are keeping the PCs under their control in violation of a Supreme Court ruling that the PCs be governed by elected councillors. He revealed this at a conference held on Wednesday. He is au fait with election laws and judicial decisions pertaining to them. Those who are genuinely desirous of having the PC polls held without further delay can now explore the possibility of seeking a judicial intervention.

During the previous government, the JVP-led NPP raked the then President Ranil Wickremesinghe over the coals for postponing the Local Government polls in defiance of an SC order. It joined the other Opposition parties in demanding that the SLPP-UNP government comply with the SC order that funds be allocated for the mini polls. Going by the former EC Chief’s contention, the incumbent NPP government and its leaders have done something similar; they have been keeping the PCs under the Governors illegally.

Presenting Budget 2026 yesterday, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake announced a government decision to appoint an expert committee to draft a code of conduct for the judicial service. Before venturing to do so, shouldn’t the government comply with the SC decision the former EC Chief has referred to and hold the PC polls soon?

The Opposition never misses an opportunity to tear into the NPP government—even unfairly at times. Strangely, it has been silent on the postponement of the PC polls. Is the Opposition also wary of facing an election any time soon?

Sri Lankan politicians are known to have king-sized egos, and they behave like emperors when ensconced in power, so to speak. An opportunity has presented itself for them to do something an extremely powerful emperor once did—cutting the Gordian Knot.

Former Polls Chief Deshapriya, who is known for his eloquence, said at the aforesaid conference, that Parliament could enable the EC to hold the PC polls under the Proportional Representation (PR) system. He said that task would require only a simple majority in Parliament. The NPP has a two-thirds majority in Parliament and bringing in a new law or amending the existing ones for that purpose should be child’s play for it. Deshapriya said the time had come for the Gordian Knot to be untied.

It will take a long time to untangle the complex knot, and what should be done is for someone to cut it, the way Alexander the Great did. We are not short of political leaders who wrap themselves in the flag, declaring that they are ready to die for democracy and the people’s franchise. So, it is up to one of them to cut the Gordian Knot by taking the initiative to make Parliament remove the legal obstacles to the conduct of the PC elections under the PR system.

No political party in the current Parliament will be able to oppose such a move, for all of them helped the Yahapalana government amend the PC Elections Amendment Act to postpone the PC polls indefinitely. They are therefore responsible for the knotty politico-legal issue their despicable action has given rise to. It is incumbent upon them to make a concerted effort to clean up the mess that they themselves have created.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.