Sri Lanka eyes Hong Kong gateway to deepen China market access

Sri Lanka is looking to leverage Hong Kong as a gateway to Mainland China and wider Asian markets, as it steps up efforts to diversify exports beyond the traditional destinations, following a sharp increase in shipments to the territory last year.

Sri Lankan exports to Hong Kong rose 46.6 percent in 2025 to US $ 192 million, from US $ 131 million a year earlier, making it the country’s 13th-largest export destination, according to the Export Development Board (EDB) data.

Imports from Hong Kong stood at US $ 211 million, taking bilateral trade to US $ 403 million and leaving Sri Lanka with a relatively narrow US $ 19 million trade deficit.

Against this backdrop, the EDB is seeking to strengthen links between the Sri Lankan exporters and Hong Kong’s trade and investment ecosystem, with a particular focus on using the territory’s connectivity to reach the Mainland Chinese and other international markets.

EDB Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Mangala Wijesinghe said Sri Lanka needed to move beyond its traditional export markets and forge stronger connections with dynamic international business centres.

He identified Hong Kong as an important potential gateway to Mainland China and the broader Asian region, while stressing the need to position Sri Lanka as a competitive and reliable trade and investment destination by leveraging its diverse export base, skilled workforce and strategic location.

The push was highlighted at the ‘Bridging Markets: Unlocking Hong Kong-Sri Lanka Trade and Investment Opportunities’ seminar held in Colombo last month, which brought together more than 100 Sri Lankan exporters and business representatives.

Companies from apparel, handicrafts, ICT and software, boat building, gems, food and tea participated, with discussions focusing on market expansion, investment facilitation and building commercial links with Hong Kong and Chinese enterprises.

Sri Lanka’s main exports to Hong Kong last year included edible fish, electrical components, bulk tea, gems and diamonds, apparel and electrical and electronic products.

Invest Hong Kong’s Jakarta office Head of Business and Talent Attraction and Investment Promotion Hillwan Brahmanda outlined the opportunities for the Sri Lankan companies seeking to expand through Hong Kong, including its GoGlobal initiative and the territory’s role in connecting the Mainland Chinese enterprises with international markets.

Hong Kong Trade Development Council Director for South Asia and Thailand Vian Cheung highlighted the opportunities for Sri Lankan companies to tap the council’s network of international trade fairs and business summits to reach overseas buyers and establish partnerships.

The latest initiative comes as Sri Lanka intensifies efforts to diversify its export destinations. Total merchandise and services exports reached an estimated US $ 10.49 billion in the first seven months of 2026, up 5.5 percent from a year earlier.

The EDB said it would continue working with the Hong Kong trade and investment agencies to facilitate participation by the Sri Lankan companies in trade fairs, business missions, investment programmes and targeted business-to-business engagements.