World Science Day: What constrains our scientific advancement?

The world celebrates science today. The United Nations proclaimed November 10th World Science Day for Peace and Development in 2001. Since then, different themes of global importance have been emphasised each year with activities conducted worldwide to focus the attention of the public and policymakers. The theme this year is Trust, Transformation and Science for Tomorrow.

How did science originate and transform the world? What constrains instilling science in society? And what science do we have to pursue today to manage the 2050s?

The human species transformed through three distinctive steps, driven by forces of organic evolution and linguistic communication; empirical technologies and beliefs; and finally, science and science-based technologies. Linguistic communication sharpened thinking – a much older trait humans possessed – empowering empirical technologies and indulgence in beliefs. Technologies, learned by experience and improved by trial and error, increased the production of commodities.

Tools and implements reduced the burden of manual labour, providing people with little relief of leisure. They pondered how the world they see and the good and the bad they experience arise. A straightforward conclusion was that agents like them, but extraordinarily superior (gods), ordered everything.

A remarkable feature of human society is the opinion of an outstanding individual, influences its transformation. The Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus (620 -545 BCE) was one such exceptional person. He argued natural phenomena are not the works of gods; they are correlated and have cause and effect. Thales’s assertion gained acceptance; amidst controversy and opposition, more and more observational facts were explained as natural consequences.

Beginning in the early 1700s, it became clear the only avenue available for us to unravel the secrets of nature is the scientific method – not a belief, but a method as has been said. Observations or experiments, asking questions, setting up hypothesis and further experimentation to confirm or refute the hypothesis. The approach paved the way for generalisations (theories) possessing predictive power. If predictions are disproved, the theory is discarded or amended.

Reasoning based on the scientific method converted empirical technologies into plannable engineering. Solved critical problems confronting humankind and made new discoveries. Engines powered by coal, oil and electricity increased production a thousandfold. Transport and communication systems emerged. Ways were found to control and cure human disease. The result was a striking improvement in the quality of life and a consequential increase in the population.

Beginning in the 1800s, the world population increased steeply as an outcome of scientific advancement. Automotive machines facilitated the production and transport of goods. Scientific understanding improved health and sanitation. The invention of the Haber–Bosch process to produce synthetic nitrogenous fertiliser in 1909 triggered an explosive population increase, from 1.6 billion to 6.2 billion in 2000. Previously, agricultural production was limited by a shortage of nitrogen fertiliser. Fertilisers and the introduction of high-yielding crops (Green Revolution) relieved widespread starvation. Today, 8.2 billion men, women and children live on this planet. Projections say the number will reach 9.8 billion in 2050.

Science not only increased the population but also continuously uplifted our comforts. The discovery of semiconductors transformed electronics by providing so many new appliances, the computers, smartphones, solar cells used at home, and machines for automating infrastructure and industry. Remedies were found to cure and control dreadful diseases. It was the understanding of things that pushed the progress steps further.

In 2017, the Swedish physician and statistician, Hans Rosling, suffering from pancreatic cancer and terminally ill, presented evidence and claimed, “The world is better now than it used to be 50 years ago.”

Will this trend continue? When a species proliferates excessively, the opposing forces take over and limit expansion. The human population has enlarged disproportionately above other species because of science and technology. The indication is that we are approaching the limits. Over – exploitation of resources causes irreversible degradation of the environment and pollution. It is not clear whether the complete elimination of emissions by 2050 would be achievable. Other forms of pollution, originating from industries, agriculture and domestic activities, continuously escalate, overburdening remediation procedures. As resources deplete, how to provide food, energy, and amenities to a huge population? When population increases and resources exhaust, conflicts propagate. New technologies introduced disturb social equilibrium, creating new problems.

Science is not everything. Art, literature, cultural traditions and ethics taught by religions matter. Yet evidence-based analysis of issues to seek explanations and find solutions is the proven and reliable method available to resolve problems we envisage would confront us in the future. Individual and social organisations need to be convinced that no other option exists.

Do the public, policymakers, professionals, including persons officially designated as scientists, follow the scientific method in reasoning and actions? It is hard to conduct surveys to determine whether people trust science. However, surveys have been conducted to assess whether people trust scientists. The answer had been statistically affirmative. A larger percentage of people agree they trust scientists. Surveys have also been carried out to determine whether people believe in astrology. Here again, a good number believe and subscribe to astrology. Strangely, many in our region highly trust both scientists and astrologers. A blind, self-contradictory mindset.

For them, Mars is simultaneously an object similar to Earth with mountains and dried riverbeds as, clear from photographs and a malefic agent who wishfully endures assertiveness of command to inflict conflicts! One might argue that Mars is an object similar to the Earth and Mars exerts malefic influence on humans are mutually exclusive statements and therefore not inconsistent. A fallacy which logicians refer to as argumentum ad ignorantiam – the absence of evidence to prove Mars doesn’t behave as a malefic agent taken as evidence for the validity of the second statement. Science endows a vast amount of correlated information to arrive at conclusions. That information fails to see a connection or envisage a connection between human conflicts and Mars.

People consider science as something useful and trust those who possess science-based skills and deliver useful materials and tasks. They concurrently believe in astrology and other superstitions because they have not assimilated science as a method for explanatory and evidence-based analysis of problems and finding solutions. Assimilating science in the above spirit was named “scientific temper’’ by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who said:

“What is needed is the scientific approach, the adventurous and yet critical temper of science, the search for truth and new knowledge, the refusal to accept anything without testing and trial, the capacity to change previous conclusions in the face of new evidence, the reliance on observed fact and not on pre-conceived theory, the hard discipline of the mind—all this is necessary, not merely for the application of science but for life itself and the solution of its many problems.”

Meanings of the terms scientific method, scientific inquiry and scientific temper differ. Scientific method is the rigorous procedure of examining evidence, framing a hypothesis and carrying out experimentation to verify or refute the assertion aiming at a generalisation. Scientific inquiry refers to the broader concept of questioning issues curiously in light of existing knowledge, seeking explanations and if such explanations are not possible, the realization of the necessity of new knowledge. Scientific temper is the convinced acceptance of scientific inquiry as the right method to address issues. Trust in science implies possession of scientific temper.

Resolution of predicaments we would encounter in future requires more efficient and widespread use of existing science and generating new scientific knowledge. The inescapable prerequisite is inculcation of scientific temper in society. So many challenges that seemed irresolvable in instants past were subsequently resolved by science. We need to be confident of this fact and trust science.

What constrains instilling the scientific temper in our society? It is the attitude of considering science only as something useful and making decisions based on beliefs. Education has not succeeded in transforming our society into a culture thinking otherwise. It highlights the usefulness of science and not the explanatory power. Policymakers see only the material usefulness of science and frame policies accordingly.

It is not necessary to have a degree in science to acquire a scientific temper. General education should introduce science as a way of thinking that clears the mind away from myth. Our teachers do not talk about the folly of astrology in lessons about constellations! Although in the Kalama Sutra, Buddha said to question everything and not accept anything unless you are convinced. Parents and teachers discourage children from questioning religious teachings. Perhaps the ‘establishment’ advocates punishing children to prevent them from asking such questions.

Quack and alternative medicines confuse the public. To obliterate the issue, we need to educate people on how modern drugs are tested for use. If existing knowledge and laboratory experiments suggest a compound may be efficacious as a drug to cure a sickness. Pills containing the compound or a placebo (harmless inactive compound) are randomly administered to a group of patients following a procedure. If the patients who have taken the drug show statistically significant improvement in contrast to the placebo, the drug could be promising and warrants further randomised trials. If both sets of patents were cured. It is more likely that the procedure, not the drug, that cured the disease. In many alternative medicines, the attraction is not even a placebo effect but advertising and hearsay. Generally, in today’s context, experimental results alone would not be sufficient to confirm efficacy. A convincing theoretical argument is required to explain why the drug works and is safe. We have experienced adverse repercussions of not adhering to the scientific method – alternative medicines for Covid and alternative fertilisers for agriculture.

‘Our scientific activities have not achieved much success in nurturing and directing minds towards scientific inquiry. Education and research incline excessively towards technology, ignoring fundamental science. Policymakers think such adjustments of the curriculum would deliver more innovations. The outcome is just the opposite; we remain poor in innovations.

All major scientific breakthroughs have arisen from untiring effort to understand things and not making things. With understanding, you make better things. Without understanding, you either copy or make substandard things.

In framing policies, we should keep in mind that today’s fundamental science brings forth technology for tomorrow. The American mathematical physicist Robert Dijkgraaff, a former director of the Institute of Advanced Study, Princeton, once said, “These days we are able to deal with diseases at the molecular level, only because 50 years ago we allowed scientists to ask basic questions about the foundations of life. Basic research is not a cost. It is an investment that in the end will allow us to be much more cost effective.”

To face the challenges of tomorrow, we should scale up basic science awareness, education and research today. In years to come, many of the issues resolvable using existing knowledge will be taken up by AI, shifting the human resource market in favour of those skilled in generation of new knowledge – people competent in basic science skills.

Sri Lanka stands weak in fundamental science in education, research and dissemination activities – fundamental studies in modern context virtually absent and not encouraged. Science education in schools prepares students to learn techniques and pass examinations and the tuition they buy goes to the extreme of that art. Universities and research institutions increasingly emphasise technological aspects of science, lessening the basic component.

The primary purpose of education is not learning to know things or do things, but to understand things. Richard Feynman, Nobel laureate and one of the founders of quantum mechanics, said his success owed much to his father. When he was a child, fathers insisted on the importance of understanding and not merely knowing things. Though a salesman of tailored uniforms, he possessed a scientific temper. Understanding qualifies one to do big things and make big things!

Research conducted in our institutions is largely incremental and grand challenges rarely undertaken. We are short of thinkers of the caliber who care nothing except curious inquiry and have not succeeded in turning ample exceptional talent in the country in that direction. We need institutions that accommodate persons of that brand.

An article titled “Promoting Science Day. An important Day in Today’s Society” in the “superprof. blog”, succinctly depicts the purpose of World Science Day as:

“Albert Einstein. Marie Curie. Stephen Hawking. Nikola Tesla. Rosalind Franklin. Alexander Graham Bell. Benjamin Franklin. What do the very talented people mentioned above have in common? They were all scientists who dedicated their lives to uncovering fundamental truths for us to understand the world better. Defined as a systematic enterprise that organises knowledge in the form of explanations and predictions, science has been around forever and is not quite going anywhere. So, to raise awareness about the ever-important academic discipline of science and all that it entails, World Science Day was established. “

World Science Day and the following Science Week activities will serve the purpose intended if they are conducted in the intellectual spirit of the above quote, rather than a routine yearly affair. World Science Day is a reminder for us to examine constraints impeding our scientific advancement and initiate necessary action.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.