Rolls – Royce in Ceylon

The tropical island of Ceylon, renamed Sri Lanka in 1972, has been romantically known as the Pearl in the Indian Ocean and the Emerald Isle, due to its location and the island’s lush, green landscapes, particularly its rice paddies and extensive tea plantations. For more than a century it was a Portuguese colony, then Dutch and in 1802 it became part of the British Empire.

Tea was introduced in the middle of the 19th century and grew to being a key agricultural industry. Lipton’s and Brooke Bond were well-known brands in Ceylonese kitchens. In the other direction came goods manufactured in Great Britain. The names of Austin, Humber, Morris, Wolseley and even Rolls-Royce were represented amongst cars available for purchase

Importers of mainly pre-owned Rolls-Royce models were tea planters. But other buyers, of brand-new Rolls-Royces, were wealthy Ceylonese landowners of estates, including coconut plantations. From the coconut, a strong alcoholic beverage known as arrack is derived from toddy, yielding large financial returns for those ‘arrack renters’ who owned licensed premises which they rented to local retailers.

Rolls-Royce Limousines of suitable stature were also acquired for Governors/Governors-General and, later, for Prime Ministers. This book describes 29 Rolls-Royce motor cars which had some connection with Ceylon. With over 300 illustrations covering almost 200 pages, the book is a collector’s item of academic quality and great historical interest.

The book begins with an illustrated history of Ceylon as an entrée into the country, and a description of the people who acquired the 29 cars and then of the cars themselves. It is as much an attractive coffee table book as an academic work, being a definitive account of these Rolls-Royce motor cars with a connection with Ceylon.

Prompted by the well-known author Tom Clarke, club members Sir John Stuttard and Roger Thiedeman, a Ceylon-born Australian Rolls-Royce enthusiast and researcher, have produced a descriptive and illustrated record.

The book will be published by The 20-Ghost Club in January 2026. Copies can be ordered through the club, with net sales proceeds accruing to The Sir Henry Royce Memorial Foundation, custodian of the original Rolls-Royce records. The book will be priced at £35 per copy plus postage. Postage rates will vary depending on destination.

Working with Dr. Dahanayake and some advice to public servants

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.