LOLC Divi Saviya returns with ‘Obai Mamai Ape Ratai’ initiative

LOLC Holdings Group Managing Director/CEO Kapila Jayawardena (right) hands over the first family super pack, commencing phase one of the family super pack delivery

Leads massive Rs. 400 m worth three-phase Cyclone Ditwah relief mission

LOLC Divi Saviya yesterday renewed its commitment to help Sri Lanka  recover from Cyclone Ditwah impact with the launch of “Obai Mamai Ape Ratai” (You, Me, and Our Motherland) initiative.

With an investment exceeding Rs. 400 million, LOLC Divi Saviya “Obai Mamai Ape Ratai” represents one of the largest and most comprehensive corporate-led efforts in Sri Lanka focused not only on relief, but on restoring dignity, stability and hope. This commitment to responding decisively in times of national adversity is rooted in the legacy of Divi Saviya’s earlier interventions.

The “Obai Mamai Ape Ratai” programme has been structured as a comprehensive, end-to-end programme addressing relief, recovery, and resilience. It will be implemented in three carefully planned phases.

Phase one focuses on immediate relief through the distribution of specially designed family super packs containing rations and essential non-food items for displaced families. Phase two advances recovery through a major renovation drive to upgrade educational infrastructure across 200 schools island-wide. Phase three addresses the most critical need, the complete reconstruction of a few selected schools that were entirely destroyed creating fully functional learning environments from the ground up. This holistic initiative will not only rebuild physical structures but also equip schools with all necessary facilities, ensuring a sustainable and future-ready educational ecosystem for the nation.

Phase one beneficiaries include families displaced by floods and landslides who are currently residing in temporary shelters across six districts: Badulla, Matale, Kandy, Nuwara Eliya, Ratnapura and Kegalle.

Each relief family super pack has been thoughtfully assembled to meet the living conditions and urgent needs of these families. Each pack provides comprehensive relief supporting a family unit for over two weeks. The packs include essential food items such as rice, dhal, sugar, soya, canned fish, and milk powder, as well as vital non-food items including bedsheets, towels, pillows, mats, undergarments, personal hygiene products, and mosquito nets.

Phase one of LOLC Divi Saviya ‘Obai, Mamai, Ape Ratai’ was ceremonially inaugurated yesterday at the LOLC Head Office with the participation of Group Managing Director/CEO Kapila Jayawardena, and officials of the Disaster Management Centre. The first family super pack was officially handed over to the MTV Channels which is a partner to this initiative.

Jayawardena said: “LOLC, as a brand of the people and for the people, has always stepped forward in times of national need. Through Divi Saviya, the Group has once again demonstrated the responsibility of a true corporate citizen. Since its inception in February 2022, Divi Saviya has continuously stood with our people, making this the largest humanitarian initiative undertaken by a corporate to date.”

Defence Ministry Additional Secretary, Disaster Management Division K.G. Dharmatilake said: “LOLC Holdings has once again demonstrated what it truly means to be a responsible Sri Lankan corporate citizen. Through initiatives such as Divi Saviya, the Group has set a benchmark for the corporate sector, demonstrating that business excellence can, and must, go hand in hand with compassion, social responsibility, and stewardship of the environment. We are thankful to LOLC Holdings for leading by example and for the support provided to the nation.”

The launch of the “Obai Mamai Ape Ratai” program ensures that the aid reaches the most in need. A comprehensive island-wide survey has been conducted by MTV Channels Ltd., the infrastructure facilitator of LOLC Divi Saviya in collaboration with the respective Divisional Secretariats and Disaster Management Centre (DMC). Under the supervision of relevant authorities, the project team has identified severely affected families, 200 damaged schools, and several completely destroyed schools. All findings were verified by government bodies, ensuring the initiative reaches the right beneficiaries efficiently and transparently, laying the foundation for a targeted and accountable relief effort.

LOLC has long stood as a symbol of compassion and solidarity, stepping forward whenever Sri Lanka and its people face moments of hardship. Its flagship Divi Saviya reflects a deep understanding of both the immediate and long-term needs arising from widespread floods and landslides that have affected thousands of families and disrupted education across several regions.

The Divi Saviya was first brought to life through ‘Jeewithaya Dinannata’ (To Win Life), which provided dry rations to communities affected by the global pandemic for over 100 days, reaching 125,000 families with a total investment of Rs. 500 Million. This was followed by ‘Daye Daruwange Anagathaya Wenuwen’ (On Behalf of the Future of the Nation’s Children), launched amid the economic crisis when schools were experiencing closure due to rising dropout rates. It supported 296,000 students across 4,090 schools, covering nearly 40% of Sri Lanka’s total school population, with an investment of Rs. 2.5 billion.

Salagama Tamil School, Matale damaged from landslides will be covered under the 200 school  renovation project in phase two

Weragama Sri Sunanda Vidyalaya, Niwithigala damaged from landslides will be covered under the 200 school renovation project in phase two