Project Of Universal Mindfulness Village (UMV): Transitioning A Concept Into Reality

I was incredibly fortunate to have joined the live stream of a dhamma discourse convened by the Universal Mindfulness Village (UMV) on 31st May 2026, featuring 3 erudite Buddhist Prelates of repute, who came together to share their perspectives on the essence of 3–Ms (Mind, Mindfulness, Meditation) with an emphasis on spreading Buddha’s message of peace, compassion and loving kindness to people around the world. A detailed transcript of the discussion is summarised below, being edited and condensed for better comprehension. Please note acronyms have been introduced for each of the 3 Buddhist monks in the transcript, namely, (1) Bhante Gunaratana (Bhante G), (2) Bhante Dhammajiva (Bhante D), and last but not the least, (3) Bhante Pannakara (Bhante P) for ease of reference.

Universal Mindfulness Village (UMV) – The First of Its Kind in the World

It was an informal open-ended forum aimed at bringing cross cultural dialogue and traditions together in facilitating a novel project called “Universal Mindfulness Village” (UMV) in Sri Lanka – which is one of a kind anywhere in the world. Even though the project is still in its infancy, the UMV is sure to get off the ground soon with funding to be sourced from local and foreign partners. In the next phase, the UMV is set to branch out overseas with a grand plan to turn the world into a Universal Mindfulness Village for all mankind. In attendance at the forum were inter-alia, Bhante G, Bhante D and Bhante P as guest speakers. Taking turns, the monks shared their perspectives on a myriad of topics ranging from, (1) Bhante G’s unparalleled service for the propagation of Buddhism and spiritual emancipation of Buddhist communities in the United States of America, (2) Bhante D’s novel initiative of setting up a Universal Mindfulness Village (UMV) in Sri Lanka – dubbed as a centre of spiritual excellence for mindfulness and meditation, and (3) Bhante P’s Dhammachetiya Project and Global Walk for Peace initiative that has captivated millions of people in America and elsewhere in the world.

All in all, the spiritual blessings and sentiments offered by monks during discussions brought wisdom and comfort to those who joined the form in person and online. A frank, friendly, and cordial exchange of views characterized the discussion that continued for over an hour. Indeed, it was such an insightful, inspiring and eye-opening experience to all. The forum was moderated by anchor Ranga Jayawardena, an accomplished dhamma explorer with years of experience as a seasoned dhamma practitioner.

A Brief Introduction on Guest Speakers (Bhante G, Bhante D and Bhante P)

Bhante Gunaratana (Bhante G): born in Sri Lanka in 1927, and affectionately known as Bhante G, has been an ordained monk since age 12. He holds a Ph.D. in Philosophy from The American University and is the founding abbot of the foremost Buddhist Meditation Retreat in West Virginia. He is the bestselling author of the classic meditation guide Mindfulness in Plain English, a book that introduced the art of mindfulness to millions of people throughout the world. Bhante Dhammajiva (Bhante D): is the chief abbot of the Nissarana Vanaya Forest Monastery & the founder of the UMV, a project that aims to bring mindfulness in a secular manner across the boundaries of national, religious and cultural institutions. He also founded Sathipasala or Mindfulness School, a project that has established mindfulness as part of the core weekly school curriculum in Sri Lanka, through which around 4.5 million school children, representing nearly 20% of the country’s population have been, and continue to be trained in mindfulness. Last but not the least, Bhante Pannakara (Bhante P): is the deputy abbot of the Huong Dao Vipassana Centre in Fort-worth, Texas, who spearheaded the ‘Walk for Peace Initiative”; inspiring and uniting the world under the banner of world peace and mindfulness.

It was indeed a one-of-a-kind discussion at which 3 Buddhist prelates of the highest repute were in attendance, and speaking on the essence of Dhamma for the sake of humanity. The monks emphasized their collective will and commitment to strive for world peace, unity and spiritual emancipation for all. The fact that three senior monks of the calibre of Bhante G, Bhante D and Bhante P coming together and joining hands for a worthy cause was indeed a blessing in disguise, and would serve as a beacon of hope in ushering a new era of mindfulness and spiritual emancipation for all mankind. After years of unwavering dedication and commitment, what began as a long-cherished dream is finally unfolding into an exhilarating, almost-tangible reality. Above all, it’s a dream come true for the 3 Buddhist prelates who found common ground to stand together in unison, and speak with one voice.

Indeed, I am certain that the spirited discussion that continued for over an hour featuring 3 Buddhist prelates would have been a rewarding experience to all viz-a-viz listening first-hand to the highest authorities of Theravada Buddhism. Their wisdom on Buddhist teachings seemed unparalleled, having lived through, and lived by the dhamma for decades. It’s indeed a holistic experience to me and many others in the truest sense of the word. To be honest, I had never been exposed to such a transformative dhamma experience in life, for which UMV deserves all credit for taking the lead in convening such a timely dhamma forum, and inviting eloquent and erudite Buddhist prelates to share their insights, wisdom and experience on an array of practical dhamma topics of current interest.

The thread of comments on the web shared by those who joined the forum was so overwhelming, and speaks volumes about the extra-ordinary nature of matters discussed on a wide array of topics of contemporary relevance to Buddhism in this day and age. The audience was in captivation throughout, and so was I, for clarity and insightful discourse ensued. Suffice it to say, the timing of the forum couldn’t have been better, especially at a time when the world is in dire straits, marred by unimaginable chaos, hatred, and violence in every nook and corner across the global landscape.

The Buddha, the Fully Awakened One or the Enlightened One, with his infinite wisdom (pragna) discovered what is called the fundamental nature of human mind, and the unsatisfactory nature of all phenomenal existence. It was he who raised the veil and showed us the world as it is, the unending suffering and pain all beings are heir to. The Buddha taught that the mind is the primary creator of human experience and the ultimate source of both suffering and liberation. Rather than treating the mind as a permanent “soul” or a physical byproduct of the body, early Buddhist texts analyze it as a dynamic, ever-changing stream of mental activity.

The very first verses of the Dhammapada establish the supreme importance of mental states: “Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their chief; they are mind-made.” The Buddha explained that our intentions, thoughts, and attitudes act as a filter for how we perceive reality. As espoused in the Buddhist Doctrine, 3-Ms (Mind, Mindfulness, Mediation) are at the heart of Buddhist teachings and Buddhist way of life, and resonate well and truly with Buddhist practitioners. In Buddhism, mindfulness is the practice of maintaining a non-judgmental, present-moment awareness of one’s thoughts, bodily sensations, and environment. Practicing mindfulness allows anchoring one’s attention on the breath or body so as to help prevent the mind from spiraling into anxiety about the future or rumination on the past. Furthermore, meditation translates ancient wisdom into tangible habits that manage stress, and cultivates resilience amid one’s busy schedule of life.

Bhante G, turned 99 in 2026, is a well-accomplished versatile monk with a profound acumen in dhamma, counting well over 80 years of priesthood, who played a pioneering role in introducing Theravada Buddhism, mindfulness and peace walk to people in the United States, rendering a yeoman service as a spiritual guru and master. Among others, Bhante G is one of the most respected Buddhist monks, and has written extensively on dhamma and Buddhist teachings. Among many publications to his credit, the book titled “Mindfulness in Plain English” was named a “Best Seller” in mindfulness and has been translated into more than two dozen languages.

Bhante G’s Remarks on Theravada Buddhism, 3-Ms and His Mission in America

In his opening remarks, Bhante G spoke briefly about his life-long commitment to dhamma with emphasis on how Buddhism has evolved and rooted among local communities, viz-a-viz ever growing popularity of Buddhism in the United States of America. Commenting on the Buddhist renaissance in America, Bhante G underscored the significance of 3-Ms for the mindfulness of young Buddhist novices; whose interest in Buddhism has grown exponentially over the years. Bhante also elaborated on the younger generation’s penchant for Buddhism and spirituality amidst their busy life and sophisticated lifestyles. Drawing parallels with other faiths and beliefs, Bhante spoke of notable exceptions in Buddhism, citing its overarching influence on the spirit of mind, wisdom and humanity. Bhante G, being a pioneering visionary in promoting 3-Ms (mind, mindfulness, mediation), has revolutionized the way in which Buddhist teachings have become popular among local communities, who seemingly have embraced Buddhist teachings as a way of life, rather than dogma – rooted in mythical and conceptualised Buddhist practices which have outlived realistic dhamma with the passage of time. Interestingly, the young Buddhist practitioners tend to be more and more aligned with rational, philosophical and spiritual aspects of Buddhism – which is a welcome move. Bhante has spent 8 decades in introducing and bringing mindfulness to the forefront of human thought in America being the bedrock for gaining supreme enlightenment. That’s precisely why Bhante G has emphasized and championed the concept of mindfulness in the course of cultivating inner peace, wisdom and spirituality in one’s mind, allowing him/her to navigate daily stresses with clarity and calm; rather than being overwhelmed by material path which invariably would set the stage for lopsided development, much to the bane of humanity. In other words, practising mindfulness is a lofty mission, setting an example to those who tend to be averse, and non-committal to practising dhamma. Bhante G emphasized that people in general appeared to be lacking in spirituality and mindfulness as they are more and more focussed on materialistic life, being overly obsessed with greed, cravings, delusion and sensual pleasure which have become the order of the day, albeit trusting in materialistic success rather than spirituality. He echoed the Buddhist teachings, affirming that mindfulness practice is an overall universal panacea for all ills: to lead a spiritual life worthy of humanity. Citing mindfulness and meditation being Buddhism’s core values, Bhante said Buddhist doctrine stands out as a unique philosophy in view of its prime focus on the mind and spirituality, being foremost for mindful living. Bhante also laid emphasis on the importance of meditation as central to one’s wholesome conduct and deeds, while underscoring the prominence given to mindfulness in the seventh step of the noble Eightfold Path, thus placing it at the forefront of Dhamma doctrine, and going hand in hand with human spirits, thoughts and consciousness.

As for Sri Lanka’s status-quo in Buddhist affairs and its ambitious drive to promote Buddhism and dhamma abroad, Bhante G expressed optimism on Sri Lanka’s prospects amidst its growing influence as a centre of excellence in Buddhism, being the cradle of Theravada Buddhism since time immemorial. Commenting further. Bhante appreciated the current government’s proactive approach in positioning and promoting Sri Lanka as a foremost destination for Theravada Buddhism across the globe. When asked for his thoughts on the UMV project, Bhante G whole-heartedly welcomed the wonderful opportunity to attract Buddhists and lay people from abroad on religious tourism, taking advantage of the country’s pioneering status in meditation and mindfulness practices, for which Bhante G extended his support and blessings. Elaborating further, Bhante G underscored the importance of widening the scope of UMV so as to position itself at the global sphere of influence, amidst elevating its profile strategically with an eye on Buddhist countries and well-wishers abroad. Speaking on Bhante P’s global spiritual missions which led to heightened international awareness, recognition and interest world-wide, Bhante G acclaimed the selfless and steadfast vision and commitment of Bhante P, often playing a pivotal role akin to a Spiritual Ambassador promoting Theravada Buddhism and dhamma for mankind. Upon being queried on the scope and role of Buddhist monks in this day and age, Bhante G laid emphasis on the significance of Buddhist doctrine and dhamma teachings in alleviating peoples’ sufferings and their unwholesome deeds through adherence to the spirits of Three Jewels, Four Noble Truths and Noble Eightfold Path.

Bhante G’s Book – “Mindfulness in Plain English” – The Best Selling Book in Mindfulness

The book was first published in 1994, and is one of the bestselling, and most influential books in the field of mindfulness. It’s easy to see why. Author Bhante Gunaratana, a renowned meditation master, takes us step by step through the myths, realities, and benefits of meditation and the practice of mindfulness. The book showcases Bhante’s trademark clarity and wit as he explores the tool of meditation, what it does, and how to make it work. The reader can gain deeper understanding, inner peace, and clarity through meditation practice with the thoughtful guidance of this classic book. Written for those without any meditation background, but also an essential handbook for established students, Mindfulness in Plain English is a must for anyone exploring the benefits of Buddhist meditation. The expanded editions include a new chapter on cultivating loving kindness, an important topic in today’s world. For anyone who is new to meditation, this is a great resource for learning how to live a more productive and peaceful life.

Taking his turn, Bhante D briefed the audience on the primary purpose of his current visit to the United States, and delivered brief remarks on the project “Universal Mindfulness Village” (UMV) for the benefit of those who joined the forum.

Bhante D’s Remarks on UMV’s Vision, Scope, Prospects & Strengths – Key Takeaways

At the outset, Bhante D spoke on the scope, vision and objectives of the Universal Mindfulness Village (UMV) and its benefits for the peoples’ well-being and spiritual tourism. Elaborating on the proposed UMV project, Bhante outlined his vision to usher in an era of spiritual emancipation / renaissance through UMV, which is a holistic project akin to the proposed Dhamma Chetiya Project at the Huong Dao Vipassana Bhavana Centre in Texas. Explaining the UMV concept in detail which is still in its infancy, Bhante D expressed his desire to implement the project at the earliest to be able to promote Sri Lanka as a Universal Mindfulness Village and share its success story with like-minded monasteries and countries for the purpose of promoting mindfulness as a universal global endeavour for the sake of humanity as a whole. In his opening remarks, Bhante D, emphasized his life-long commitment to see the entire world becoming a universal mindfulness village one day. Elaborating on his much hyped UMV project in Sri Lanka, Bhante D noted his sheer determination to get the project off the ground, and up and running soon. In so doing, he was hopeful of Sri Lanka’s unique opportunity to whole-heartedly embrace the UMV, and welcome Buddhist pilgrims from abroad focussing on thematic tours, specially catering to visitors interested in mindfulness, meditation and spiritual Buddhism. Bhante also noted with apprehension, the heightened threats, dangers and uncertainty prevailing across the globe in the face of peoples’ obsession with materialistic possessions, excessive consumerism and commercial exploitation that are commonplace today. Commenting further, Bhante cited the prevailing trends in the world status-quo, pointing to the imminent dangers facing humanity across multiple landscapes. Moreover, Bhante D expressed frustration at the escalating geopolitical tensions between major nuclear-armed powers, including territorial disputes, and regional conflicts etc, at the risk of descending the world into anarchy, threatening humanity in its entirety. While directing his disappointment at the irresponsible conduct of certain powers that be, Bhante D was optimistic of the UMV projects being replicated and adopted elsewhere on the global landscape (besides Sri Lanka), negating the possibility of a full scale war in the making whatsoever. Bhante D also emphasized his passion to work towards transforming Sri Lanka into a mindful nation, with the prospects of becoming a country of mindful souls, and eventually becoming a warm-hearted, peaceful, friendly and hospitable destination for visitors from abroad.

Bhante D was hopeful of the like-minded joining hands and coming together to introduce the concept of mindfulness into their communities and societies in recognition of the strengths and positive impact of UMV as a catalyst to bring forth meaningful exchanges and tangible results for the sake of humanity and future generations. Speaking further, Bhante extended an open invitation to like-minded monasteries, temples, philanthropists and places of religious worships across the world, to consider adopting the concept of UMV with an open mind within their localities, and consider extending their blessings and support to implement the model UMV in Sri Lanka with an eye on the world community out there. He was assertive that the concept of UMV deserves to be considered in good faith, and introduced to like-minded countries so that whoever visits Sri Lanka and visa-versa from a mindful state will have mindful places, mindful gardens and mindful peoples within each country of interest, so as to enjoy, relax and experience the mindfulness and its benefits all year around regardless of ethnic, religious, cultural, geographical barriers. Bhante also remarked that Sri Lanka could become a paradise for religious tourism, thereby taking the lead in promoting spiritual tourism and mindfulness as central pillars in its drive to promote Sri Lanka as a year-round spiritual destination for tourists from friendly and like-minded countries.

UMV Project Vs Dhamma Chetiya Project : Complimentaries, Similarities and Avenues for Cooperation

Taking cue from Bhante P’s Dhamma Chetiya project which is scheduled to be launched and inaugurated in Texas in 2027, Bhante D outlined the proposed UMV project, being envisioned on a holistic manner akin to Dhamma Chethiya project, which is very much on the drawing boards to be taken off soon, thanks to the generosity of philanthropists and well-wishers. Part of the UMV project called “Sathi Pasala” or “Mindfulness School”, is already up and running, offering spiritual training and practical sessions to over 4 million school children and adults alike. The UMV project – yet in its initial stage, and built on thematic concepts is inter-alia aimed at promoting spiritual awareness and mindfulness among school goers for their wholesome development with an eye on mindful living and Buddhist way of life. Once the project becomes fully operational, it will benefit almost all school children who would learn mindfulness and meditation in schools, being part and parcel of the school curriculum. Drawing parallels between Dhammachetiya and UMV Projects, Bhante D spoke of complementaries and similarities of the two, citing possible learning experiences and collaborative mechanisms in the short, medium and long terms, while advocating regular consultations, and exchange of delegations and opinions on possible areas of shared interest and cooperation for mutual benefit.

Last, but not the least, Bhante P, who has been an ordained monk for 17 years, under the guidance of Bhante Ratanaguna, Chief Abbot at the Huong Dao Vipassana Centre in Texas took his turn. After a brief introduction of himself, Bhante P spoke of his “Walk for Peace Initiative” and his Sri Lankan adventure, which he cited as historical, for being able to promote his message of peace among Sri Lankans throughout his 8-day visit, before returning home with the Sacred Relic of the Buddha and Bo Sapling of Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Tree. What’s really special about Vesak celebrations in Texas this time though, was the public exposition of the Buddha’s Sacred Relic and Bo Sapling at the Huong Dao Temple in Texas on the occasion of Vesak, thus heralding a turning point in Sri Lanka – The United States bilateral relations. He reminded the monks of his commitment to continue peace walks in future, with an emphasis that “lasting world peace begins with inner peace and personal transformation”. Bhante P also expressed satisfaction that his Walk for Peace mission in Sri Lanka has made a positive impact on the whole of nation and peoples, while echoing the sentiments expressed by President Anura Dissanayake that mindfulness is the panacea for all ills, which he said resonates well and truly among a large majority of people in the country, for whom he conveyed his heartfelt appreciation.

Dhamma Chetiya Project – A Trajectory for Buddhist Renaissance and Posterity

Elaborating on his state-of-the art project “Dhamma Chetiya”, Bhante P briefly outlined its overall concept, vision and objectives for the benefit of those in the audience and others who joined online. Speaking exclusively on the Dhamma Chetiya project, Bhante Pannakara recalled his early years into monkhood, and a vow made himself, dedicating his life for the propagation of Buddhist teachings and Buddhist way of life for the spiritual emancipation of all beings, besides preserving the Buddhist culture and heritage for posterity. Bhante P’s one-of-a-kind project is to build a Buddhist complex called Dhamma Chethiya on a 14-acre plot of land in Texas, to be converted into a fully-fledged centre of spiritual excellence comprised of 840 marble stupas to be inscribed with Buddhist scriptures, and other sacred objects for posterity. The project, the brainchild of Bhante himself, is also meant to address certain overwhelming concerns that the excessive use of AI, online platforms and software tools in this day and age, could be of potential danger and nuisance – placing Buddhist heritage, literature and dhamma scripts at significant risk of being covertly altered, doctored and faked, thus compromising the sanctity, ethics and morality of Buddhism, often lacking authenticity, originality, senses of spirit, and core message and values. With this noble concept at his heart, Bhante P is to launch this most-sought-after project in 2027 and expedite its implementation phase with the active support and blessings of well-wishers and the like-minded towards its eventual completion in a few years.

Upon being asked whether he would consider extending support for Bhante D’s proposal to set up UMV (Universal Mindfulness Village) as a model project in Sri Lanka viz-a-viz with a potential to branch out and set up similar ventures across the world, Bhante P responded affirmatively and whole-heartedly, confirming his desire to support it in whatever means possible, subject to the approval of his spiritual leader.

1. Taking into consideration what transpired at the forum on 31st May on the project “Universal Mindfulness Village (UMV) on the one hand, and its unprecedented benefits and enormous potential for the country, and the overall socio-economic, cultural and spiritual well-being of the people, and their transformation for the better on the other, I’m of the firm opinion that the project is worthy of support by the government in whatever means possible on priority basis.

2. Besides the Sathi Pasala which is already up and running benefitting over 4.5 million school going children in mindfulness and spiritual training being part of school curriculum, it is believed that the project once become fully operational would contribute significantly for the wellbeing of Sri Lanka’s school children in its entirety in a wholesome and holistic manner.

3. Mindful of the fact that a child’s early years of holistic development is key to his/her overall development, and progression to becoming a mature adult with a sound and wholesome mind, UMV’s training in spiritual mindfulness would be critical for a child, and for an adult to cope with life challenges and realities with confidence and resilience.

4. Given that the cases of heart-broken stories among children are commonplace today, amidst the use, and addiction to drugs and narcotics tend to be on the rise among school children, it is vital that children be exposed to mindfulness training and preventive measures through counseling and mental (spiritual) therapies so as to guide them on the right path at all times. In this context, UMV could play a catalyst role in dissuading children from taking drugs and alcohol etc, while advising them against seeking sensual pleasures as prescribed in the Five Buddhist Precepts and Ten Buddhist Precepts.

5. The UMV could conduct informal sessions and engage children in regard to advising them on the importance of maintaining good moral and ethical values. In doing so, the school children could be offered advice, guidance, warning and precautions on the good and bad behavioural conduct, social etiquettes, moral high grounds and feel good factors etc

6. On the economic front, UMV could play a pivotal role in promoting religious / spiritual tourism through which the country will be able to harness its true potential in projecting a positive image and profile as an attractive destination for high-end spiritual and religious tourists in collaboration with like-minded countries and institutions.

7. All in all, Sri Lanka is best placed and positioned to bring out its best in terms of profiling and positioning the country as a wholesome, holistic spiritual, religious, cultural, archeological and heritage destination, viz-a-viz its landscapes, attractions, places of interests and sites with a view to patronizing foreign tourists to Sri Lanka to enjoy, experience and partake in religious and spiritual tourism.

8. Above all, Sri Lankans prided themselves in their 2600-year-old Buddhist era and proud civilization, will be in a position to benefit from their rich and unique Buddhist and spiritual mindset, while offering Sri Lanka’s home-gown products and services such as meditation, ayurveda and local therapies, architectural wonders such as Sigiriya, Adams Peak etc for those seeking Buddhist way of life, spiritualism, mindfulness, meditation, local hospitality and local therapeutic treatments etc .

9. My special thanks go out to Bhante Saddhajeewa, Deputy Abbott at the Buddhist Monastery in West Virginia for assistance extended to me in finalizing the write-up at short notice.

“The ‘you’ that goes in one side of the meditation experience is not the same ‘you’ that comes out the other side.” – Bhante Gunaratana in Mindfulness in Plain English

*The writer is a retired Ambassador and Foreign Ministry Spokesman. He can be reached at schandrad@hotmail.com