Govt. says those who attempt to discredit CIABOC have vested interests

Cabinet Spokesman and Mass Media Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa defends appointment of Ranga Dissanayake as DG of CIABOC

Says former Minister Gammanpila should get redress from legal process

Accuses those against CIABOC of shielding culprits involved in corruption and bribery

Cabinet Spokesman and Mass Media Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa has urged those questioning about the legality of the appointment of Ranga Dissanayake as Director General (DG) of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC) to seek redress from the Supreme Court.

Addressing the weekly post-Cabinet meeting media briefing, he said that if the selection made by the Constitutional Council was flawed, irregular, and unconstitutional, former Minister Udaya Gammanpila or any other concerned party could go through a legal process to challenge Dissanayake’s appointment.

“Criticising is of no use when there is a legal process available. I know former Minister Gammanpila is well conversant with the law in this regard,” he said, questioning the motive behind raising allegations against the CIABOC DG long after his appointment was made.

Dr. Jayatissa expressed his suspicion over the timing of the allegation when the CIABOC had completed several investigations and begun arrests connected to corruption cases.

“We have doubts whether some parties, including former Minister Gammanpila, are trying to discredit the CIABOC as they have some other interests,” he said, adding that Government views such efforts as attempts not by those who are against fraud, corruption, and bribery, but only those who want to shield some involved in corruption and bribery.

He said that those who truly stand against fraud and corruption would not attack the CIABOC at a time when it is performing its duties.

Meanwhile, he reiterated the Government’s commitment to upholding the independence of the CIABOC, stressing that investigations into complaints should be carried out promptly and without interference.

Dr. Jayatissa emphasised that while the Government provided facilities and resources to investigative institutions such as the CIABOC and the Criminal Investigation Department (CID), it would not intervene in their operations.

“If someone makes allegations against an institution like the CIABOC, the best solution is for the DG or the Commission itself to respond, but not the Government,” the Minister said.

He also said that the Government had full confidence in the officials of the CIABOC as they were performing their duties responsibly and professionally.

According to Dr. Jayatissa, the attempts to level baseless accusations against the CIABOC appeared to be efforts to undermine its ongoing investigations and the best means to challenge the appointment of the CIABOC DG, who has extensive legal experience as a former Magistrate and High Court Judge, was through a legal process.

Answering a question whether there was a lethargy in taking legal actions against those who have corruption charges in the Government, he said all complaints were going through a due legal process.

“If any allegations have been made against ministers, the CIABOC will continue to investigate them according to its procedures. The Government remains committed to ensuring the CIABOC functions independently and efficiently to strengthen the anti-corruption framework,” he stressed.