Brief proposal for re-settling ‘Ditwah’- triggered landslide victims

The captioned Cyclone has caused severe damage from floods and landslides in Sri Lanka. In the past too some flooding and landslides have occurred almost annually. The last SW monsoons were followed by a severe cyclone. The consequence was much greater flooding and we experienced a disproportionate increase in serious damage through landslides.

The official death toll from landslides alone as at early December was estimated at 618 with a great many people still missing, many of whom have to be presumed as being dead. With the onset of the NE Monsoon, still more landslides are predicted. As the title indicates, this present proposal is particularly focused on dealing with the consequences of these landslides.

The damage though of a very much greater magnitude this year, the locations are as before mainly confined to the Wet Zone hill slopes. Much of the past practice has generally been to attempt rebuilding such damaged houses and resettling affected people in similar nearby terrain. Although this had achieved some limited success in the past, in today’s context of extreme and very extensive landslide damage, it is really unthinkable to even attempt to do so.

The concern focused here is on those who were resident in the Wet Zone hill slopes and have since been severely affected by the recent landslides.

The proposal is to resettle them not where they were nor in near-by Wet Zone areas but in appropriate locations within the Dry Zone which are likely to be less congested. This will not only relieve Wet Zone rural congestion in the hilly terrains but also help Dry Zone development effort which has been an increasingly important strategy for us over a great many decades.

The specific resettlement areas needed for landslide affected farming families could be in identifiable locations such as the small ‘hamlets’ serving farm lands in existing irrigated agriculture projects especially those which have seen some out-migration and thus need more farming families. These land areas could be found in zoned settlement areas of the Walawe and Mahaweli Projects all of which have access to irrigated farm lands and also easy access to needed social infrastructure. Proposed land areas targeted for the settlement of non-farming families could be within the small and medium-sized Dry Zone towns associated with the provision of urban services to existing irrigation and settlement projects.

The proposed planned resettlement work identified here clearly requires the guidance of specialized professional expertise. Of particularly importance will be

those with appropriate prior experience in the RVDB’s Walawe Ganga Project or in one of the three completed settlement efforts of the Mahaweli Project i.e. in Systems ‘H’, ‘C’ or most recently in System ‘B’.

Also, the expertise of Irrigation Engineers, Land Surveyors, Administrators and NBRI personnel, especially those with prior experience of Dry Zone resettlement projects will also be valuable for the execution of the proposed resettlement work. Many of these latter personnel could be found within the Irrigation, Agriculture, and Survey Departments or among their recent retirees, those from the former Mahaweli Development Board, the RVDB and also of course those currently available within the Mahaweli Authority.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.