Sri Lanka At Crossroads Viz-A-Viz Youth: A Clarion Call For Course Correction

At the outset, it’s worth recounting the vivid memories of LTTE and JVP insurgency, culminating in the deaths of tens of thousands of youths in their prime, in what can be called the “darkest chapter” in post-independent Sri Lanka. It was indeed a stark reminder of the plight of youth caught up “between the devil and the deep blue sea”. The history has taught us a multitude of lessons, to help us understand grim realities of the past and current state of affairs, avoid repeating past mistakes and make informed decisions for the future. In retrospect, the German philosopher Georg Hegel offered a sobering counterpoint, suggesting that “The only thing that we learn from history is that we learn nothing from history,” highlighting humanity’s frequent failure to act on the wisdom of the past. This underscores that knowledge of history alone is meaningless without the will to change our actions and apply those lessons for the future.

Suffice is to note, massive public protests (Aragalaya movement) erupted across Sri Lanka, triggered by long years of governance failures and economic hardships, forced the downfall of SLPP government in 2022 rekindling a “beacon of hope” for young voices. Nonetheless, it remains to be seen whether Aragalaya made a lasting impact in fundamentally altering Sri Lanka’s destiny, besides being a catalyst for pro-democracy movements elsewhere, namely, in Bangladesh (2024) and Nepal (2025). In essence,  Aragalaya movement, by and large, was driven by popular sentiments and a shared sense of purpose with an intent to influence public opinion or government policies for the common good.

Be that as it may, Aragalaya movement, inter alia, galvanized masses including the urban middle class and youth for a system change, demanding for greater accountability from leaders. So much so, the post-Aragalaya signaled the rejection of the country’s conventional political landscape, paving the way for the election of a more inclusive government (NPP) in November 2024. From inception, NPP introduced a cocktail of far-reaching reforms, in what could be seen as a complete shift in political landscape, power dynamics and social fabric.

Amid hue and cry, there lies a growing disillusionment among the youth, stemming from a mix of personal struggles and setbacks (future uncertainty, economic instability, societal pressures, social media hype), often compounded by existential threats and calamities. Their frustration can manifest as anger, violence, apathy, posing serious challenges for the nation, underscoring an urgency to address underlying causes with a sense of purpose-driven-commitment.

As outlined above, Sri Lanka has had its fair share of youth predicaments and misgivings to deal with. Even though, LTTE terrorism and JVP insurgency took a heavy toll on youth and economy, albeit, Aragalaya remained largely peaceful, with no ultimate winners or losers. If by chance, had Aragalaya gone out of control, Sri Lanka’s history would have been rewritten in red with a chapter on its crisis-stricken past.

From a strategic security perspective, Sri Lanka ought to be cognizant of all forms of security concerns of asymmetrical and multi-dimensional nature, emanating from both within and outside. This should be the norm rather than the exception. Any deviation from the standard protocols could be a recipe for disaster of its own making. Obviously, Sri Lanka cannot afford to suffer from similar catastrophe or misfortunes, akin to LTTE terrorism, JVP insurgency, Easter Sunday fiasco etc, in future. Lessons from past mistakes, inter alia, help build resilience, awareness and wisdom so as to handle future challenges with confidence.

A harbinger for country’s future – challenges and threats (overt and covert acts)

Amid a section of the so-called die-hard old-guard seemingly in disarray, it is typical of them resorting to overt and covert acts to whip up hatred and anger on the authorities in power,  notwithstanding NPP’s overwhelming 2/3rd majority in parliament. In retrospect, the hitherto elusive elements would take advantage of the prevailing post-cyclone status quo to stage a comeback by stirring up public dissent and chaos.  The perpetrators’  “modus operandi” could very well be working hand-in-glove with bankrupt elements to execute a sinister plan of their own choosing.

As the adage goes, “history repeats itself”, it is worth reminding ourselves of the futility of life. A case in point is the Easter Sunday terror attack in 2019 which bore all the hallmarks of a sophisticated well-executed terror campaign with perfection, resembling the likes of ISIS caliphate, Taliban etc. The perpetrators cynically exploited their brutality and unleashed violence causing mayhem and massive loss of lives. Given the grim realities and dismal failures of the past, viz-a-viz tendency of radicalized extremists and inspired elements choosing to strike at will, the authorities ought to monitor and prevent cruel elements from turning violent and placing Sri Lanka’s geo-political realities at odds with its overarching national interests. In the circumstances, the emphasis on the need to prevent a repetition of such heinous crimes cannot be overstated for all intents and purposes.

Easter Sunday attack arguably is the worst security nightmare ever to haunt Sri Lanka. It’s a stark reminder that evil forces of terrorism continue to hinder peace and humanity at their will and choosing. The carnage unleashed has been horrendous and reprehensible, supposedly inspired by hatred and extremism. The terror attack tragically laid bare the fragile nature of the country’s intelligence apparatus sending shockwaves through the defence establishment. Yet the so-called mastermind and motives behind this horrendous act remain a mystery to date. The intricate nature of legal proceedings, institutional drawbacks etc proved to be a hindrance to truth seeking and meting out justice to victims. To make matters worse, the government which promised a transparent investigation is seemingly in the dark with no clear strategy, which is “Sine qua non” for what it’s worth.

Primarily, the open economy and its inherent shortcomings brought about ill-feelings and unrest among segments of the youth – endangering the country’s peace and stability. As a consequence, a generation of youth, especially in urban metropolises has become completely disillusioned with authorities in power, to the extent of shunning politicians of all shades. Exacerbating the crisis, a large number of youth has left the country for good and keeps growing. It’s a pity, the country is unable to harness the youth’s true potential at a time their services are badly needed by the motherland. Adding to their woes, youth have been deprived of their fair share of opportunities at the risk of being “Quid pro quo.”

The growing tendency of youth becoming impatient and losing trust in the country’s long sustained well-established ethos, norms and traditions, certainly is a formidable challenge which the authorities should be mindful of, needing immediate action at the highest levels of power.

On the other hand, the exploitation of youth by opportunists, has taken a heavy toll on the marginalized youth. The youth, in hindsight, has been hoodwinked and led down badly. Contrary to expectations, the tragic irony is that a generation of youth has become a burden to the country at the peril of their own future well-being. As a matter of fact, this looming crisis is real and mind-boggling, and would run the risk of taking the country backwards, to say the least. If this trend continues, and not addressed in earnest, it could have the potential to bring the country on its knees to a point of utter chaos and instability.

Lobby groups through the means of social media, continue to create troubles for the government, exploiting youth with no mercy. These elements have propelled internet savvy individuals as propagandists cum intermediaries, thus effectively swaying public opinion against those in power to a considerable extent. Adding to the misery, some disgruntled elements have already begun smear campaigns directing verbal tirades and allegations at authorities through social media, YouTube, and blogs. This is typical of similar youth campaigns worldwide in which soft power has been at the core of their campaign strategy, creating hype, stoking up hatred and fear mongering. It is recalled how the streets and cities had been overwhelmed during Aragalaya with masses putting pressure on regime leaders to alter the course. The irony is not so much what befalls a nation of people in times of crisis, but how to come to terms and cope with the country’s destiny and its future trajectory. Alas, the government appears to be in the dark not knowing the scale of crisis viz-a-viz damage being done by social media cabals. But when it does, it may be too late to rectify the post-crisis consequences in time to come.

Given the scenario, social media activists too seem culpable and guilty for their share of controversy and ineptness. In all fairness, they must conduct themselves with utmost care and due diligence, in conformity with media ethics and guidelines so-in-far-as to promoting healthy viewer discretion. Regardless, certain social media activists and journalists are found to be an affront to ethical reporting at the risk of provoking and inciting discord among the public viz-a-viz their civil liberties, freedom and dignity.

Though, NPP has given pride of place to youth in all but name, the authorities have failed to live up to expectations, thus leaving them high and dry. As such, it is pivotal that authorities must grasp the pulse, sentiments and nuances of youth, and make them feel productive citizens in the nation-building endeavors. Among others, the latest youth trends and the urgency of bringing to bear meaningful solutions to their problems remain critical. The government ought to bring youth to the forefront and make them feel relevant to Sri Lanka’s future, sans pushing them and their concerns to the back burner in toto.

True to the motto “seeing is believing”, victims are on the move picking up pieces and reinventing their lives and livelihoods from scratch which speaks volumes for their sheer courage, determination and selflessness in reshaping their own communities devastated by the cyclone. To its credit, the government spared no time in reinforcing its enduring commitment to victims, with a package of incentives and relief. However, it must be noted that this welfare and compensation package is not a “panacea for all ills” which ought to be self-sustained with the passage of time, offering a glimmer of hope.

Sri Lanka has lost a generation of youth and unsung heroes under successive regimes. It’s ironic that they have paid a heavy price risking life and limb, under trying circumstances, namely, LTTE terrorism (1970-2009), JVP uprisings (1971 – 1988/89), Aragalaya (2022/23), menaces of narcotics, drugs etc. Their sacrifices have not been in vain: it’s time to say enough is enough and for course correction and look to the future with a sense of optimism, courage and steadfastness. The government ought to hear-out youth’s plight and keep their hopes alive with a new lease of life.

At a time, the dawn of a new year is around the corner, it is time to think afresh and reflect on the past misdeeds, drawbacks and look to the future with a renewed hope and aspirations. We, human beings, are gifted and blessed with a unique ability to think, reflect upon and come to terms with life realities in a spirit of caring and sharing with one another so as to enrich ourselves with good manners, good thoughts and good deeds worthy of ourselves, representing the epitome of goodness, self-realization and understanding. One ought to believe in self, and rely on one’s senses, strengths and talents in order to harness one’s full potential for the common good and benefit of all mankind.

In closing, let me recall what the late Foreign Minister, Lakshman Kadirgamar once told a group of SLFS officers. Upon seeing an officer trying to evade a question posed to him, the Minister remarked ” all government servants are paid out by taxpayers’ money to think rationally and act wholeheartedly in the best interest of the country and people they represent” which resonates well with those at the helm, people from all walks of life, and remains true and relevant regardless of time.

“Science may have found a cure for most evils, but it has found no remedy for the worst of them all – the apathy of human beings” – Helen Keller

*The writer is a retired Ambassador and Foreign Ministry Spokesman. He can be reached at schandrad@hotmail.com