Germany-based Sri Lankan urges diaspora to invest in SL’s economic revival

Sri Lanka has endured hardship but remains resilient. If the diaspora works together, supports each other, and contributes to national development, we can help rebuild the economy faster and stronger - Thushaan Kunabalasingam, the Lead for Ocean Cruise Line in North America of the Germany- based Livecookintable

Says Sri Lanka has potential to be a key hotspot for cruise tourism in the Indian Ocean

Emphasises Sri Lanka is on the right track with the new administration

Asserts it is the right time for international companies to invest

A Germany-based Sri Lankan professional is looking at investment opportunities aimed at strengthening Sri Lanka’s long-term economic cooperation with Germany focusing on cruise tourism, education and cuisine sector partnerships that have the potential to create new jobs while promoting tourism.

The Lead for Ocean Cruise Line in North America of the Germany- based Livecookintable Thushaan Kunabalasingam said that there was a conducive environment now for new investments in Sri Lanka.

“Sri Lanka is on the right track with the new administration, and I believe now is the right time for international companies to invest,” he said “My aim is to open doors that can benefit the country across tourism, hospitality, and education.”

As the person responsible for ocean cruise operations in North America, Kunabalasingam works closely with leading cruise operators that serve global markets. He is now leveraging those networks to bring more large-scale international liners to Sri Lanka.

During his recent visit to Sri Lanka, he held discussions with several Government Ministers and top officials to explore investment opportunities. His discussion with the Sri Lanka Ports Authority (SLPA) Chairman, was focused on enabling the arrival of vessels carrying 5,000–7,000 passengers.

He said major operators, including those calling frequently at Indian ports, bypass Colombo despite its strategic location. “Sri Lanka has the potential to be a key hotspot for cruise tourism in the Indian Ocean. With proper coordination between ports, travel agencies, and hotels, Colombo can emerge as a preferred destination,” he told the Daily FT.

Kunabalasingam is also facilitating connections between Cinnamon Hotels Group and international cruise lines to create an integrated tourism offering for high-spending cruise travellers.

Livecookintable, is a German-headquartered company operating in 60 countries, specialising in modular open-cooking systems for cruise ships, hotels, stadiums, and catering businesses. The company employs over 300–400 people globally. Livecookintable is already working with Cinnamon Hotel, which has already invested in the modular kitchen concept of open cooking.

“The company’s CEO wants to expand our business to Asia and wanted to start it in India but I requested him to switch to Sri Lanka as the country’s economy is getting better and also I want to help this beautiful country where my roots are,” Kunabalasingam said adding that the company will do a feasibility study which will run till 2007 to check its viability.

He said the research was done together with the Delegation of German Industry and Commerce in Sri Lanka.

“My motivation to support Sri Lanka is my roots in Sri Lanka although I was born in Germany. I always had an eye on this beautiful country. Since I am dealing with ocean cruises the plan is to bring more cruises to Sri Lanka. When I met the SLPA Chairman Admiral (Retd.) Sirimevan Ranasinghe, he positively welcomed the proposal and said they can manage ocean cruises,” he added.

Kunabalasingam, whose parents hail from Jaffna, was born and educated in Germany and the UK as his parents moved to Germany in 1978. He studied economics at the Ruhr University and Queen Mary University in London.

He noted that a time table was needed to open avenues for those cruises to enter the country and needed to work with travel agencies and hotel chains.

The company’s plans include establishing operations in Colombo by 2027, subject to the ongoing market research phase. This research, conducted jointly with the Delegation of German Industry and Commerce in Sri Lanka (AHK Sri Lanka) and the Board of Investment (BOI), will determine investment feasibility, costing, and export potential.

Beyond corporate expansion, Kunabalasingam is leading a parallel initiative, independent of his company, to strengthen Sri Lanka’s education sector through university partnerships, student exchanges, and joint research programs.

He said that during his visits to Sri Lanka this year, he met academic teams at the University of Colombo, University of Jaffna, University of Rajarata, and University of Moratuwa to explore the opportunities of promoting partnerships in tourism, medical and business sectors.

Kunabalasingam said that after returning to Germany, he engaged with universities in Southern Germany, all of whom expressed readiness to collaborate. These initiatives, he emphasises, are part of a charitable, non-commercial effort to create pathways for Sri Lankan students to gain global exposure.

He has already met President’s Secretary Dr. N.S. Kumanayake, and has received positive responses from Government stakeholders.

“Sri Lanka needs more international academic mobility. The talent is here, but opportunities must be expanded,” he said.

Kunabalasingam expressed confidence in the country’s direction under the current Government, citing improved political stability and investor sentiment.

According to Kunabalasingam, several international companies, particularly from Germany, are showing renewed interest in entering the Sri Lankan market as reforms take effect.

“A lot has changed, and change takes time. But the first step is always the most important and Sri Lanka has taken that step,” he said, adding that he is in touch with the German Embassy and other stakeholders as they are Government to Government initiatives.

Meanwhile, Kunabalasingam urged the Sri Lankan diaspora to support the country’s economic revival and quoted Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam; “It should never be a political aim; it should be a national aim.”

“Sri Lanka has endured hardship but remains resilient. If the diaspora works together, supports each other, and contributes to national development, we can help rebuild the economy faster and stronger,” he said.