LankaPak 2025: Celebration of creativity and testament to resilience

Industries and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handunneththi says packaging should be seen as an investment for global success

Proposals benefiting the sector have been submitted for 2026 Budget

Reveals discussions with IMF included how to protect packaging from VAT

LankaPak 2025 was successfully concluded last week at the BMICH, bringing together the region’s most influential stakeholders in the packaging industry.

As one of the most significant events in the South Asia’s exhibition calendar, this three-day expo saw a new benchmark for innovation and collaboration.

LankaPak – 26th edition of exhibition organised by the Sri Lanka Institute of Packaging in collaboration with CDC Events, backed by Government and private sectors, has grown over the years to become one of the most anticipated industry showcases.

This year’s event was larger and more diverse than ever, reflecting the expanding role of packaging across industries by both local and international participants.

Over 100 companies exhibited across over 150 stalls, representing packaging machinery and materials, processing, printing, labelling, sustainable packaging solutions, and allied sectors. With foreign participation from China, Pakistan, India, and other South Asian Nations, the event reinforces its international appeal as a regional hub for trade, innovation, and collaboration.

The Sri Lanka Institute of Packaging (SLIP) President Thusith Wijesinghe delivered the welcome address, noting 26th edition, has firmly established itself as the definitive meeting point for the entire packaging value chain.

Wijesinghe described the platform’s value, emphasising it allows manufacturers, suppliers, and designers to explore advancements and gain insights. For exhibitors, he asserted, LankaPak offered unique opportunities to showcase technology, launch innovations, and build regional ties. He mentioned the exhibition is a celebration of creativity and a testament to the sector’s resilience.

This year’s event introduced the ‘Tech Show,’ a new presentation area where exhibitors shared their expertise with visitors. The SLIP also hosted two globally significant events at the 114th World Packaging Organisation (WPO) Board Meeting, drawing over 40 delegates from various countries, and a three-day Global Packaging Forum which featured speakers from international packaging communities.

Industries and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handunneththi speaking about the importance of packaging he emphasised that preserving the ‘Made in Sri Lanka’ as a brand globally requires acknowledging the product’s origin. The Minister observed that enterprises, from SMEs to large-scale firms, are actively competing to enter international markets.

He stated international market entry is impossible without packaging, as it is a fundamental marketing tool. He insisted the goal must be to present our products through better packaging as success relies first on attracting attention. He advised that all expenditure on packaging should be seen as an investment for global success.

Addressing obstacles, he highlighted VAT problems faced by manufacturers, where a cost is applied to packaging comparatively similar to the product’s value. He disclosed that proposals benefiting the sector have been submitted for the upcoming Budget, with expected successful implementation. Further, discussions were recently held with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on how to protect packaging from VAT. He praised the strong innovative drive of local entrepreneurs and reiterated the Ministry’s commitment to supporting sustainable packaging initiatives.

Principal sponsor for LankaPak 2025, Polydime International Ltd., Sales and Marketing Director Johann Tranchell mentioned a saying, ‘you cannot judge a book by its cover,’ however in business products are judged by their packaging. He identified packaging as the first reference point for Sri Lankan manufacturers aiming for global success, affirming the industry’s vital role.

Tranchell noted the sector’s challenge is its valuation by price. Restating the Minister’s point, he insisted money spent on packaging should be seen as an investment, demanding recognition for the value added over the cost.

LankaPak 2025 functioned as a gateway for exhibitors to new markets and partnerships, and for visitors to gain insights into innovation. The event continues to drive innovation and strengthen the South Asian packaging sector.

The exhibition attracted wide visitor representation, including exporters, retailers, and international buyer delegations. The event offers exhibitors key networking and partnership opportunities. Knowledge sharing includes daily presentations on trends and a Packaging Clinic providing professional advice from Sri Lanka Institute of Packaging experts were other key features.