JVP playing by JR’s rule book?

The JVP-led NPP government has a proclivity for locking horns with trade unions although it pledged to champion workers’ rights during its Opposition days. It has antagonised state workers in several key sectors to the point of driving them to protest or even strike.

Workers have played a pivotal role in unsettling governments and bringing about regime changes in post-Independence Sri Lanka. They were an integral part of the so-called Pancha Maha Balavegaya (Five Great Forces)—the Sangha, physicians, teachers, farmers and workers—that enabled the rapid ascent of S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike’s SLFP and its allies to power in 1956. Workers and their trade unions also led the 1953 hartal from the front and brought the then UNP government to its knees.

The JVP used workers and trade unions to achieve its political goals. It dominated the trade union sector, and was behind almost all workers’ struggles, which had an unsettling effect on successive governments. The JVP-led NPP would not have been able to win elections and savour power but for workers’ support. State employees voted for the NPP overwhelmingly, as evident from the sheer number of postal votes it polled in the last three elections.

The JVP/NPP, during its election campaigns last year, made a solemn pledge to look after workers’ interests in case of forming a government. It said there would be no need for trade unions to resort to protests or strikes because an NPP government would solve all their problems! However, state workers are now on the warpath. The Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) employees have intensified their trade union action; they have decided against cooperating with the top management of the CEB in protest against the manner in which the government has chosen to restructure their institution. The CEB workers have sunk their political differences and joined forces to pressure the government to heed their concerns and adopt remedial measures, but the JVP/NPP has opted to bulldoze its way through. Thus, the warring trade unions in the power sector and the government are playing a game of chicken, and the possibility of workers resorting to a strike, as the last resort, cannot be ruled out. The CEB and many other state institutions need to be restructured, but that is a task to be carried out cautiously in consultation with trade unions. The JVP’s trade union arm, which used to drive the CEB workers to strike at the drop of a hat during previous governments, is now condemning the CEB workers’ labour struggle!

Postal workers are resentful that the Postmaster General has said something derogatory about them. They are still reeling from the manner in which the government brought their recent strike to an end. They were made to return to work on the government’s terms. Minister of Health and Mass Media Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa told the postal strikers in no uncertain terms that it was his way or the highway. He said they had to use the biometric attendance tracking system before asking for a discussion with him. They fell in line. Adding insult to injury, he has made a snide remark about the postal strike. There is no gainsaying that all state workers must use biometric attendance systems because allegations of overtime rackets abound. But this rule must apply to all state workers equally. Doctors have refused to use the biometric attendance recording system. The National Audit Office has disclosed that Customs officers do not use biometric attendance systems. The government is wary of taking any action against the aforesaid health workers and Customs officers. Is it that the NPP thinks all state workers are equal but doctors and Customs officers are more equal than others?

Teachers have rejected the proposed educational reforms. Their trade unions are resentful that the government has not engaged all stakeholders in the task of reforming education. The government itself does not seem to have a clear idea of what it has undertaken to do in the name of educational reforms. Teachers have also taken exception to the proposed amendments to the Penal Code to ban physical and non-physical punishment in schools. General Secretary of the Ceylon Teachers’ Union Joseph Stalin has said clear interpretations of the proposed amendments are necessary regarding what actually constitutes non-physical punishment. The rights of children must be safeguarded, but teachers’ legitimate concerns must also be addressed.

It will be a huge mistake for the JVP/NPP to give trade unions the so-called karapincha (curry leaves) treatment—using and discarding them. It ought to engage them and settle labour disputes through negotiations. Sadly, it appears to be playing by J. R. Jayewardene’s rule book in dealing with trade unions.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.