Standard Chartered appoints Vindya Hettige as Head, Legal and Head, Legal Client Coverage for Sri Lanka

Standard Chartered Sri Lanka has appointed Vindya Hettige, as Head, Legal and Head, Legal Client Coverage, effective 20 March 2026. Vindya will join the Country Management Team and will be responsible in providing strategic legal advice and ensuring governance with respect to legal risk pertaining to business conducted by the Bank while promoting a culture and practice of compliance with legal standards, regulatory requirements and high ethical standards within the Bank in Sri Lanka.

Vindya is an Attorney-at-Law and Commissioner for Oaths offering over 18 years of experience. Having joined Standard Chartered in 2014, she has worked with multiple stakeholders, covering all businesses and functions, by providing strategic legal advice, recommendations in mitigating legal risk and ensuring governance around the legal framework. Before joining the Bank, Vindya was an integral part of the banking and finance team at Nithya Partners where she gained relevant experience. She holds a Master of Laws in Banking and Finance from the University of London, and a Bachelor of Laws from the University of Colombo.

Standard Chartered Sri Lanka CEO, Bingumal Thewarathanthri, said, “Vindya’s appointment to this critical leadership role is a proud moment for all of us. Her journey with the Bank has been one of dedication, resilience, and consistent excellence, and she has grown alongside the organisation, contributing meaningfully at every step. This milestone is not only a testament to her capability and leadership, but also a reflection of the Bank’s culture; one that truly values and invests in internal talent, recognising the deep expertise and potential within our own teams. I am confident that Vindya will continue to inspire and lead with impact in this next chapter.”

Standard Chartered Sri Lanka remains committed to building a strong leadership pipeline by fostering a culture that champions growth, inclusion and opportunity. Vindya’s appointment underscores the Bank’s continued focus on developing internal talent and empowering individuals to take on impactful leadership roles. As the Bank looks ahead, it remains dedicated to driving sustainable growth while delivering value to its clients, colleagues, and communities.

Globally, Standard Chartered Bank is a leading international banking group, with a presence in 53 of the world’s most dynamic markets and serving clients in a further 64. Standard Chartered Bank’s purpose is to drive commerce and prosperity through its unique diversity, and its heritage and values are expressed in its brand promise, here for good. Standard Chartered PLC is listed on the London and Hong Kong stock exchanges. For more stories and expert opinions, please visit Insights at sc.com.

For more stories, please visit our Global and Local websites.

Standard Chartered Sri Lanka is a licensed commercial bank supervised and regulated by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, and is rated AAA(lka) by Fitch Ratings Lanka Ltd.

Pan Asia Bank empowers over 1,000 women for International Women’s Day

Sri Lanka Brand Forum aims to reshape business for a ‘BANI world’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.