Sohan … a total entertainer

Sohan Weerasinghe is, indeed, a legendary singer and entertainer, and what makes him extra special, to the ladies, in particular, is his captivating performances and versatility.

And, guess what! The charismatic performer is off to Canada, this week … to woo the audience, in that part of the world, especially the ladies, they say.

His performances are always high-energy and engaging, and that’s probably why he’s so loved by fans of all ages! Yes, he has definitely earned his reputation as a crowd-pleaser!

The trip to Canada is for two engagements – Mega Stars Spring Blast Dinner Dance on 28th March, and Concert the following evening, 29th March.

All these engagements, he is now achieving, is as a solo artiste, and he has plenty coming his way.

Before his departure for Toronto, he did Richmond Night on 20th March, Royal College Group Sing-Along, and Battle of the Maroons, and on his return he will be in the spotlight at Ballad of the Warriors – a show for the Special Forces.

Ballad of the Warriors will be held on 11th April at the Grand Maitland Hotel, in Colombo.

All these engagements, as a solo performer, is definitely an indication that Sohan is a total entertainer. His energy is infectious, and he knows how to work a crowd.

Sohan Weerasinghe: A beloved figure in Sri Lankan entertainment / Sohan: Nowgoing solo

Sohan was the leader of the popular band Sohan and The X-Periments, blending Western melodies with Sinhala rhythms and creating a unique sound.

Early in his singing career, he was influenced by international artistes like Elvis, Engelbert, Tom Jones, and Cliff Richard.

Initially, he pursued law but eventually chose music as his full-time career.

Sohan took over the band X-Periments in 1975, renaming it Sohan & The X-Periments.

The band gained popularity with hits, like ‘Adare,’ and the English original ‘Whispers in the Sand,’ and, of course, Sohan’s leadership and creativity helped establish the band as a household name in Sri Lanka.

Sohan has entertained audiences, with his powerful vocals and engaging stage presence, in many parts off the world, including Australia, Canada, and the US, and has also collaborated with various artistes.

In fact, Sohan Weerasinghe is celebrated for promoting Sri Lankan music, globally, and inspiring aspiring musicians.

His contributions to the country’s music scene are undeniable, and he remains a beloved figure in Sri Lankan entertainment.

Pirivenae Piyathuma – An authentic thought leader enters the heavenly passage

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.