Dijital Team Sri Lanka reaffirms commitment to continuous employee growth through partnership with LinkedIn Learning

Dijital Team Sri Lanka has emerged as one of the first companies in the country to officially launch LinkedIn Learning for all its team members. Working in collaboration with the LinkedIn team from India, the platform made its recent debut for employees at Dijital Team Sri Lanka’s office, located at the World Trade Centre, Colombo.

Conducting an in-person walkthrough session at the Dijital Team office, LinkedIn’s India unit demonstrated how employees could leverage the platform’s world-class learning resources to amplify the professional development of their talents and advance their careers. Upon being granted access the platform, Dijital Team employees were led through its extensive features by the LinkedIn India team.

Reinforcing the company’s standing as a talent-first organisation, the offering of LinkedIn Learning as a formal employee benefit actualises Dijitial Team’s commitment to accelerating career growth. Furthermore, it reaffirms Dijital Team as a company that prioritises active investment in its workforce as part of its broader commitment to developing Sri Lanka’s digital workforce.

Speaking on the launch of LinkedIn Learning’s platform for their employees, Peter Ward, Managing Director of Dijital Team, said, “Our vision for the company is centred on an unshakeable ethos of valuing our employees, their skills, and their professional growth. By opening access to new pathways of career and skill progression, we’re reaffirming our commitment to exemplary business practices that nurture talent by rewarding it with opportunities for greater advancement.”

Emphasising employee agility, innovation, and globally competitive competency, the programme represents Dijital Team’s core philosophy in action. By providing access to LinkedIn Learning, Dijital Team demonstrates an understanding that access to continuous learning opportunities actively expands a company’s potential to secure employee retention and business continuity.

As a formal employee benefit, LinkedIn Learning not only enables team members to build future-ready skills but also allows them to take ownership of their career journeys through structured skill enhancement and progressive career opportunities.

People’s Bank achieves PBT of LKR 16.6 billion in Q1-2026 amidst global uncertainty; group assets rise to LKR 4.2 trillion

Prudent policy adjustments could help manage a local growth rate drop – CBSL Governor

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.