Sri Lanka College of Endocrinologists and Morison continue commitment to diabetes care

The Sri Lanka College of Endocrinologists (SLCE), in partnership with Morison, a pioneer in the Sri Lankan pharmaceutical manufacturing industry, has celebrated the successful graduation of the third batch of the Diabetes Care Training Program, reaffirming the shared commitment to strengthen Sri Lanka’s response to one of its most pressing non-communicable health challenges of patient-centred diabetes care.

With one in five Sri Lankans diagnosed with diabetes, the program continues to play an important role to equipping primary care doctors with the knowledge and skills to improve early detection, treatment, and long‑term management of the disease.

Launched in February 2024, the Certificate Training Program has now trained over 180 General Practitioners (GPs) from the three intakes. The third batch, which commenced in May 2025, has now successfully completed the four‑month course, receiving certification at a graduation ceremony held recently.

The certified GPs are equipped with the latest knowledge, practical tools and skills needed to improve early detection, treatment, and long-term management of diabetes. With the graduation of the third batch, SLCE and Morison are able to expand access to quality diabetes care and strengthen the healthcare system.

The four-month training course facilitated and delivered by the SLCE, is the first of its kind in Sri Lanka. Course content features an evidence-based curriculum, combining theoretical knowledge with practical applications, ensuring participants receive up-to-date knowledge adhering to the latest Clinical Practice Guidelines and international standards.

Further enhancing the value of the program, the graduates also benefit from SLCE’s awarding of Continuing Professional Development (CPD) points, further enhancing the value of the qualification.

Importantly, the initiative is helping to bridge the gap between specialist and primary care, ensuring more patients receive timely and effective treatment.Morison is a truly Sri Lankan pharmaceutical manufacturing company, with a rich legacy of over 60 years of industrial expertise.

ASPI dips below 23,000 index points as days-long bull run fizzles out

Nufloe elevates movement and rehabilitation in Sri Lanka through Pilates

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.