Christell Luxury Wellness crowned Asia-Pacific’s Wellness Clinic of the Year at global summit in Singapore

Christell Luxury Wellness CEO and Aesthetic and Regenerative Medicine Specialist Dr. Shanika Arsecularatne (left) and Founder and Co-Chairperson Professor Ramani Arsecularatne

Christell Luxury Wellness has made history as the first Sri Lankan aesthetics centre to win the Wellness Clinic of the Year award from the entire Asia Pacific region at the prestigious GlobalHealth Aesthetics and Wellness Summit, Conference and Awards 2025.

The annual summit this year in Singapore convenes Asia’s leading aesthetics and wellness professionals under one roof, bringing together the region’s industry thought leaders at the forefront of expertise and innovation. The full-day conference on 12 October featured high-level sessions and seminars, culminating in a gala awards ceremony which served to both honour outstanding achievements individual and corporate and also celebrate industry success.

In addition to this top honour, Christell Luxury Wellness was awarded Gold in three major categories: Aesthetic Clinic of the Year, Most Innovative Clinic of the Year and Trichology Clinic (Non-Transplant) of the Year.

Christell Clinic CEO and Medical Director Dr. Shanika Arsecularatne was recognised as the Sri Lanka Aesthetic and Wellness Icon.

The Company said this marks the first time a Sri Lankan medical wellness brand has been recognised at such a scale on the global stage, establishing Sri Lanka as a rising destination for medical wellness tourism.

“This award is not just a win for Christell. It is a win for Sri Lanka,” said Dr. Shanika, “We are proving to the world that our country can lead in medical wellness tourism by combining compassion, science, and tradition. Our vision is to place Sri Lanka on the global wellness map as a trusted destination for beauty, healing, and longevity.”

Christell Founder and Co-Chairperson Prof. Ramani Arsecularatne added, “For decades, Sri Lanka has been known for its natural beauty and Ayurveda. With Christell, we are elevating this heritage by adding world-class evidence-based medical aesthetics expertise and longevity treatments. This recognition proves that Sri Lanka can compete with the best in the Asia Pacific.”