CIC Holdings partners OrphanCare

CIC Holdings Group CEO Aroshan Seresinhe (second from left), hands over the donation to OrphanCare Head Azad Zaheed. Also present were CIC Group Head of Human Resources Harshana Ranmuthugala (on extreme left) and OrphanCare Deputy Head Marshad Barry (extreme right)

Diversified conglomerate CIC Holdings PLC has partnered with OrphanCare Trust as a Corporate Partner, supporting the Trust’s mission of securing the future of orphans who transition out of institutional care upon reaching the age of 18.

This collaboration marks a significant step forward in the shared commitment of both entities to prevent a “second abandonment” of orphans, a term used to describe the loss of care and support children often experience once they leave institutional homes.

The partnership between CIC Holdings and the OrphanCare Trust underscores the importance of sustainable, compassionate interventions that ensure every child has access to financial independence, stability, and opportunity beyond institutional care. Guided by Article 2 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, OrphanCare ensures that all orphaned children have access to the program without any form of discrimination, irrespective of their race, colour, religion, region or ethnicity.

CIC Holdings Group Chief Executive Officer Aroshan Seresinhe said: “At CIC Holdings, we firmly believe in creating lasting social impact. Supporting OrphanCare Trust aligns perfectly with our purpose of nurturing lives and communities. We are proud to play a part in giving these children the opportunity to grow with dignity and hope”

OrphanCare Head Azad Zaheed said: “We are deeply thankful to CIC Holdings for their generosity and trust in our cause. This partnership strengthens our efforts to ensure that every orphaned child in Sri Lanka receives the care, guidance, and support they truly deserve”

Established with Amana Bank as the founding sponsor, OrphanCare aims to create a nurturing and enabling environment for the orphaned children to thrive and avoid a second abandonment. A notable feature of this initiative is that Amana Bank ensures that every donated rupee directly reaches the intended beneficiaries since all administrative and operational costs are fully borne by the bank. To date OrphanCare has enrolled over 3,200 orphans from 90+ child care homes across the country. OrphanCare recently unveiled its inaugural Impact Report, highlighting the transformative difference it has made in the lives of orphaned children across Sri Lanka. The report is accessible at www.orphancare.org

The OrphanCare Trust is administered by a team of trustees who have a track record of passionate social service and includes Chairman of the Trust Ruzly Hussain (Founder of the Rotaract movement in Sri Lanka), Osman Kassim (Founder and Past Chairman Amãna Bank) K.R. Ravindran (Chairman, Board of Trustees of Rotary Foundation USA and former President Rotary International), Jazri Magdon Ismail – Treasurer (Past President AAT), Sharad Amalean (Co-Founder MAS Holdings), Tyeab Akbarally (Senior Director, Akbar Brothers) Harsha Amarasekera (President’s Counsel), Deshabandu Tilak de Zoysa (Chairman, Helpage Sri Lanka), Kasturi Selvaraj Wilson (Former Group CEO Hemas Holdings PLC) and Mohamed Azmeer (Managing Director/CEO Amãna Bank). The Trustees have instituted a strong governance framework to maintain the highest standards of integrity and ensure the long-term sustainability of the Trust.