CIPM SL successfully conducts 9th Certified HRD Auditor Programme

The internationally acclaimed Certified HRD Auditor Programme 2026 was successfully conducted for the 9th time at the CIPM Members’ Lounge with the participation of 21 HR professionals representing leading organizations across Sri Lanka.

Organized by the People Management Solutions Division (PMS), the corporate HR solutions arm of Chartered Institute of Personnel Management Sri Lanka in collaboration with T V Rao Learning Systems, this exclusive 5-day certification programme has been designed to strengthen internal HR audit capability and develop strategic HR leadership competencies aligned with modern organizational requirements.

The programme commenced on 15th May 2026, welcoming a dynamic group of HR professionals and organizational leaders embarking on a transformative learning journey focused on strengthening HRD auditing capabilities and strategic HR impact.

“As organizations increasingly prioritize governance, culture transformation, leadership capability, and sustainable performance, the need for a strong internal HR audit capability has become more critical than ever. The Certified HRD Auditor Programme, therefore, serves as a timely and impactful initiative in developing future-ready HR professionals equipped to drive strategic organizational transformation,” said Prof. T. V. Rao – Chief Lead Facilitator.

Conducted under the expert guidance of internationally renowned HRD pioneer Prof. T. V. Rao, Chief Lead Facilitator, together with Nandini Chawla, Chief Executive Officer & Co-Founder of TVRLS, they shared valuable global insights, practical audit methodologies, and real-world HRD experiences throughout the sessions. Structured as a comprehensive 05-day certification programme, the first three physical sessions were successfully conducted on 15th, 16th, and 17th May 2026 at the CIPM Members Lounge, followed by two online learning and assessment sessions.

HNB Finance records exceptional FY 2025/26 growth, with PAT doubled

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.