Upali Seneviratne: epitome of pristine police standards

Upali Seneviratne was one of the finest officers of the Police of a bygone era, when it’s repute was at a peak. They were times when, subject to exceptions, officers considered themselves bound only by the writ of the IGP and the rule of law. Unfortunately, Upali’s odyssey with the police was relatively brief. He enlisted as a sub inspector in 1957, and retired in 1980 as an ASP.

In this period, he served first as an officer in charge of police stations, and was thereafter handpicked to serve in the CID. After some time, he was transferred to the Intelligence Services Division. The choice of Upali to serve in “specialist” organizations, particularly in prestigious branches such as the CID and the ISD at a very young age was an indication that his superiors considered him an officer who held considerable promise for the future. The experience he gathered in the CID benefited his service in the Intelligence Services Division.

He served in the police when the ranks of Inspector and ASP were held in considerable esteem. One of the main reasons for such respect was their ability to keep extraneous intrusions at bay. We also remember with nostalgia, the sight of inspectors of police riding motor cycles on the highways. The senior cadre of the police in those halcyon days was very small.

Writing from memory about events as far back as 50 years ago, the entire senior gazetted officer cadre from IGP to ASP did not exceed 50 in number in the early 1970s. There were probably four DIGs, and the balance made up of Superintendents of Police and Assistant Superintendents of Police. Senior DIG and Senior SP were not ranks that existed at that time.

Seeing the unwieldy numbers in the senior cadre today, it is arguable that the top ranks have increased without a precise plan based on a study. Many DIGs today handle assignments which are more appropriate for Superintendents of Police; and likewise, SPs and SSPs administer assignments which should be handled by ASPs. This is a sad saga.

In fact, I cannot resist saying that in mid nineties, an IGP played ” Santa Claus” by enlarging the DIG cadre from less than 20 to 45, in order to enable the Chief Security Officer of the President at the time, to be promoted a DIG. It was a unilateral decision which accelerated the decline of the police. The “evergreen” Chief Security Officer subsequently changed colours to “Robin Blue”, and rose to the rank of IGP.

Fortunately Upali Seneviratne had left by then. But in his relatively short and result laden career, he left an indelible mark on the police. So much so, that his superiors felt that the void he left would be difficult to fill. He was fortunate that he learnt varied police trades at the feet of three exemplary officers: Eleric Abeygoonewardene IGP, who I rate as the best in that post in my time, Tyrell Goonetilake whose fame surpassed even that of Sherlock Holmes, and Cyril Herath who carved a niche for the distinct contribution he made in the field of “Intelligence” in the 1970’s and eighties.

Upali Seveviratne became a favourite of IGP Eleric Abeygoonewardene for the skills he displayed in handling investigations into unsolved crimes, and in dealing with threats of subversion and terrorism. It is not often that an officer could excel in investigations as well as intelligence. Upali served in both fields with great skill. During his time with the Intelligence Services Division, he pioneered a structure combining Intelligence and Investigation arms to contend with subversive threats. It was this experience that convinced the police hierarchy that Intelligence and Investigations arms complement each other in the battle against subversive threats.

Upali Seneviratne led his men by precept and example. He was honest and honourable in dealings, respected precedents and standards hallowed by time, and in discipline, carried an ” iron fist in a velvet glove” . He endeared himself to subordinates and colleagues by being firm and reasonable. He was prodigious in applying himself to his work.

His best days were in the Intelligence Services Division in the seventies s under it’s Director, Cyril Herath. He was one of the senior officers alongside an elite group ; Kingsley Wickramasuriya, B A Jeyanathan, Pat Suwaris, S B W de Silva, Sathkunarajah, M A Jayatillaka, Kitulegoda, Ananda Jayasekara, Zerney Wijesuriya, Patikirikorale, Nihal de Silva, Vernon Werasinghe, Caldera and Muthu Banda. The Intelligence Services Division under Cyril Herath was the envy of many at the time.

Though he left the police prematurely, Upali Seneviratne served the Retired Senior Police Officers Association (RSPOA), from the 1970’s to the time of his demise. He made a distinct contribution to the welfare of retired ranks when serving as President of the RSPOA. His voice and views will sadly be missed at discussions and fellowships of the Association.

Reading what his brother Gamini wrote a few days ago, I was taken by surprise about the feats of Upali in sports. I have never heard him boasting about his skills in sports. He was modest by nature. Incidentally, Gamini was a brilliant product of Peradeniya University who later served in the prestigious Ceylon Civil Service which is now sadly extinct.

We of an earlier generation can only wish and hope that the police service will continue to be served by officers of the calibre of Upali Seveviratne. In a short span of time, he enriched the quality of policing and left an indelible mark within the service. I have no doubt that if he served longer, would have risen to the DIG rank, even if the top cadre was not inflated to shocking levels in the mid nineties. There was no stopping Upali, for he would have continued to accumulate prodigious results.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.