Hyacinthesis’ Accelerator launches to convert Water Hyacinth into livelihood opportunities

Water hyacinth flagged as a major contributor to SL’s reduced biodiversity and declining water quality, with long-term economic consequences for agriculture and fisheries.

Growing global demand for sustainable homeware/ natural fibre products, projected to exceed USD 60 billion by 2030.

Premium buyers currently retailing water hyacinth baskets and furnishings at prices ranging from USD 20 to 80 per unit

The Foundation For A Good Life (Guarantee) Limited (TFGL), in partnership with Good Life X (GLX), recently launched the ‘Hyacinthesis’ Accelerator — an eight-month, market-driven programme designed to transform Sri Lanka’s growing water hyacinth problem into a source of sustainable livelihoods and circular innovation. Supported by Scott Dunn, The Conservation Collective and the Lanka Environment Fund (LEF), the programme responds to the widespread impact of water hyacinth on Sri Lanka’s waterways, where the invasive plant disrupts irrigation, fishing and water quality. The accelerator will work with enterprises and artisan communities across Sri Lanka in 2026 to develop market-ready products using water hyacinth, pairing material innovation with structured business, design and market support.

The Hyacinthesis Accelerator addresses this challenge by repositioning water hyacinth as a valuable regenerative raw material. The programme will identify, enable and scale six enterprises working with the material. The first cohort focuses on craft and homeware as the lowest-risk entry point, while laying the foundation for future applications in paper, packaging, fertiliser and biochar. The program was informed by a scoping study conducted by the project teams, which assessed environmental impacts and market opportunities for water hyacinth based products.

An efficacious strategy to boost exports of Sri Lanka in medium term

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.