Seylan Bank enables seamless integration with eChannelling through Open API Banking platform

From left: LankaPay Manager - Business Development Kasun Wickramasinghe, Deputy Chief Executive Officer Dinuka Perera, and Chief Executive Officer Channa de Silva gathered alongside Seylan Bank AGM Digital Banking Chami Senewiratne, Head of Business Development & Revenue, eChannelling Mohan Ajitkumar, Finance Manager, eChannelling Sandun Randeni, and Seylan Bank Manager – Digital Commerce Vidula Rajapakshe to integrate eChanelling with Seylan Bank’s open API Banking platform

Seylan Bank PLC has partnered with eChannelling Ltd., to integrate with the Bank’s Open Application Programming Interface Banking platform, a move that marks another milestone in Seylan’s digital banking journey.

Through this integration, eChannelling will now execute real-time, secure, and automated payments via Bank Accounts in collaboration with LankaPay’s JustPay services. It also facilitates instantaneous reconciliation which is paramount in this operation. The collaboration enhances operational efficiency, minimises manual intervention, and ensures faster transaction settlements, ultimately supporting eChannelling’s digital-first service delivery model.

Seylan Bank’s Open API Banking platform enables Corporate and SME clients to connect their Enterprise Resource Planning or internal business systems with the Bank’s infrastructure, offering seamless, secure, and automated transactional financial services. This integration simplifies high-volume transaction management and drives efficiency across multiple business operations.

“This partnership with eChannelling demonstrates how Seylan Bank’s Open API Banking platform is transforming the way businesses manage payments,” said Seylan Bank AGM Digital Banking Chami Senewiratne. “Our goal is to empower Sri Lankan enterprises with technology-driven financial solutions that promote speed, security, and automation.”

The collaboration also highlights Seylan Bank’s commitment to enabling connected digital ecosystems for Sri Lankan corporates. By providing direct integration to customer ecosystems, the Bank helps organisations optimise their payment operations and focus on core business growth.

eChannelling Ltd., Head Business Development and Revenue Mohan Ajithkumar said, “Partnering with Seylan Bank allows us to further enhance our payment efficiency and reliability. Seamless real-time reconciliation ensures a smoother experience for both our customers and partner hospitals.”

The onboarding of eChannelling marks a significant step forward in Seylan Bank’s digital banking roadmap, reinforcing its position as a trusted digital partner for corporates and a leader in Transaction Banking innovation.

With Open API Banking, Seylan Bank continues to play a key role in driving digital adoption among Sri Lanka’s business community, supporting the nation’s journey toward a more connected and automated financial ecosystem.