Allianz Annual Awards 2026 celebrates ‘rare, regal and remarkable excellence in Sri Lanka’

Allianz Lanka celebrated excellence and performance at the Allianz Annual Awards 2026, held under the theme “Rare. Regal. Remarkable.” The event recognized outstanding achievements from 2025, honoring individuals who have redefined standards and delivered exceptional results across Sri Lanka’s general insurance landscape.

With over 20 years of serving Sri Lanka’s general insurance industry, Allianz Lanka continues to empower individuals, businesses, and communities across the island. At the heart of its approach lies its brand promise, “To Us, You are Always #1,” reflecting a deep commitment to putting customers at the center of every interaction. By focusing on simplicity, clarity, and accessibility, Allianz ensures that every solution is designed to make life easier and more secure for its customers.

Globally, headquartered in Munich, Allianz operates in more than 70+ countries and has been ranked the world’s no.1 insurance brand for seven consecutive years in Interbrand’s Best Global Brands 2025 ranking. Despite its global scale and recognition, Allianz Lanka attributes its success to its people individuals who consistently deliver with determination and bring the company’s customer-first promise to life.

The Allianz Annual Awards 2026 commenced with a welcome address by Chief Marketing Officer Kasun Yatawara. This was followed by addresses from CEO and Country Manager Prashant Grover, Chief Distribution Officer Ranga Dias, Head of National Sales Jayanath Alwis, Head of Agency Distribution and Retail Prasanna Kodikara, and Head of Corporate Sales Malik Peiris.

BYD’s global leadership visits Sri Lanka as brand deepens regional commitment

Perituza conducts insightful AI workshop for Sri Lanka’s PR and Ad agencies

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.