AG tells SC 22nd Amendment does not require referendum

Colombo, Sep. 3 (Daily Mirror) - The Attorney General yesterday informed the Supreme Court that the proposed 22nd Amendment to the Constitution does not seek to amend any of the entrenched provisions specified in Article 83 of the Constitution and, therefore, does not require approval at a referendum.

Solicitor General Viraj Dayaratne, appearing for the Attorney General, made these submissions when 67 Special Determination petitions challenging the constitutionality of the proposed amendment were taken up for hearing for the second consecutive day before a five-judge bench comprising Chief Justice Preethi Padman Surasena and Justices Achala Wengappuli, Arjuna Obeyesekere, Sampath Abayakoon and Gihan Kulatunga.

The Solicitor General submitted that counsel appearing for the petitioners had failed to establish how the proposed constitutional amendment violated Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution affecting people’s sovereignty.

He further told Court that the proposed increase in the number of judges and the retirement age of judges was intended to enhance the overall efficiency of the judiciary in the country.

Responding to arguments that adequate consultation had not been carried out before introducing the proposed amendment, Dayaratne submitted that the law did not require such a consultative process.

“Consultation may be good or bad, but determining whether such a process was followed is not a duty vested in this Court at this stage,” the Solicitor General submitted.

He further argued that the Supreme Court should not take into consideration predictions made by various parties regarding what might or might not happen if the proposed amendment was enacted.

President’s Counsel Nigel Hatch, appearing for intervenient petitioner and Parliamentarian Lakshman Nipuna Arachchi, yesterday submitted to the Supreme Court that the provisions sought to be amended under the proposed 22nd Amendment to the Constitution were not entrenched provisions and therefore did not require approval at a referendum.

He argued that the proposed constitutional amendments could therefore be enacted with a two-thirds majority in Parliament without being referred to the people at a referendum.

Referring to the Supreme Court’s determination on the Thirteenth Amendment Bill, Hatch submitted that the Court had held that Article 4 of the Constitution was not an entrenched provision.

Rejecting an argument advanced by the Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) that the proposed amendment would undermine the independence of the judiciary, Hatch contended that increasing the retirement age of judges would not affect their integrity or judicial independence.

He further submitted that the arguments advanced by the BASL and other petitioners were based on hypotheses, assumptions and fanciful arguments, rather than concrete evidence.

Hatch argued that the BASL had failed to present any cogent basis to establish how the proposed amendment would adversely affect the independence of the judiciary.

He said the primary purpose of the proposed constitutional amendment was to introduce a series of judicial reforms, including increasing the retirement age of judges and expanding the number of judges.

“The proposed amendment seeks to increase the cadre of judges, while the number of High Court judges is also proposed to be increased through amendments to the Judicature Act,” Hatch submitted.

President’s Counsel Mohan Weerakoon, appearing for another intervenient petitioner, Sarath Manamendra, submitted that the proposed amendment to Article 107(5) did not concern an entrenched provision of the Constitution and therefore did not require approval at a referendum.

He also referred to the United Kingdom, where, he submitted, the retirement age of judges had been increased through a simple majority.

Counsel Chamara Nanayakkarawasam, appearing for another intervenient petitioner, submitted that the new proviso concerning the retirement age of the Chief Justice was intended to remove an ambiguity that existed in the Constitution.

He said the proposed amendment had now expressly specified the retirement age of the Chief Justice, thereby removing the ambiguity.

Nanayakkarawasam further argued that the proposed constitutional amendment had been introduced as a matter of government policy and could be enacted with a two-thirds majority in Parliament.

He maintained that the proposed amendment did not affect Article 3 of the Constitution and, consequently, there was no requirement for the amendment to be submitted to a referendum.

The 67 Special Determination petitions were filed challenging the constitutionality of the proposed Twenty-Second Amendment to the Constitution. The petitions are being considered by the Supreme Court in determining whether the Bill requires approval by the people at a referendum in addition to the required parliamentary majority.

Meanwhile, the Supreme Court yesterday concluded the arguments put forward in support and against the 22nd constitutional amendment bill. Later on, the Supreme Court’s determination over the proposed constitutional amendment bill is to be communicated to the President and the Speaker.