Sumith Liyanage – boxing legend of Olympic fame

Legend is a label which is offered too generously in our country. This may be true even of “national honours”. Certain characteristics or elements help define or identify a legend. Achievements of an outstanding nature in a particular trade or discipline, accomplishments beyond the reach of others and established records that can be an inspiration for emulation, stand out as elements necessary for a person to be considered a legend.

Such achievements should also have a beneficial and salutary impact on the progress of the particular discipline, the achiever becoming a catalyst for growth and progress. Legends are generally limited in number and are an exclusive or elite group.

Sumith Liyanage, an unbeaten national champion and competitor in boxing at the Rome Olympics in 1960 amply fits the ‘legend’ label. He retired from the police as a DIG after an unblemished career. Dignity and decorum were features of his way of life. Sumith is now 90 years old and his two colleagues from the police boxing, C P Jayasuriya and Dharmasiri Weerakoon, both legends of Olympics fame, have departed from this world. Sumith is the sole surviving Olympics boxer in the country today.

His boxing career spanned a period of 12 years. From his schooldays in Ananda and Nalanda Colleges to the Rome Olympics, the pinnacle of his career, he trod a path laden with success, glory, and impregnability. He was only once beaten here at home.

Handsome, stylish, swift footed and technical, imperious, his vicious right hook floored many an opponent. In fact, this right hook floored Jercz Adamski of Poland, the reigning European champion in the “Feather Weight class”, at the Rome Olympics in 1960. Adamski who bounced back beat Sumith on points and eventually won the Silver Medal in his weight.

Those were times when legendary heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson dominated world boxing. Sumith somewhat resembled Patterson in looks and style and was nicknamed the ” local Floyd” by his admiring fans. I think it would also not be wrong to say that he had many similarities to the famous boxer ” Sugar” Ray Robinson, an extremely fleet footed and hard puncher. These comparisons bore ample testimony to his talent and class as a pugilist.

Somewhere in 1962, after playing for University in a Sara Trophy cricket match on the University grounds, I hurriedly made my way to the Police Depot ring (now Field Force Headquarters) to watch the Boxing Nationals. This was my first glimpse of Sumith Liyanage who tamed Corporal Wickramapala of the Army, a reputed boxer of the day, with consummate ease.

He made a distinct impression with his science, nimble footwork, speed and style. His counter punching against a bold, relentless opponent was a feature to watch. I left the venue fully satisfied after watching the amazing standards in boxing on display. I have seen some competitions in seventies and eighties but hold the view that the standards in the sixties were far superior.

I remember with nostalgia, a few other excellent boxers at this meet, mostly from the Police and Armed Services : Marshall, Hepponstall, Boustead, Hope, Percy Wijesuriya, Ekanayake brothers [Hector and Bertie], Elsworth Pereira, Dharmasiri Weerakoon and CP Jayasuriya.

When I joined the police in 1965, CP Jayasuriya, Sumith Liyanage and Dharmasiri Weerakoon were already well settled in the Service. What was evident at the time was the fierce competition among outstanding schoolboy sportsmen to enlist in the police as Sub Inspectors.

The police in those heady days of the 1960s and seventies was a much admired service.

This heritage was influenced by exemplary leaders who generally did not succumb to unlawful dictates.

Some of the outstanding sportsmen who joined the police in the 50 s’, 60 s’ and 70 s’ come to mind: Jayasuriya brothers [HP, CP, SP], Sumith Liyanage, Dharmasiri Weerakoon, Eddie Grey, Barney Henricus, Percy Wijesuriya in boxing; Werapitiya, Brindley, Neil Weerasinghe, Dhanasiri Weerasinghe, Kehelgamuwa, Burke, H C Perera, Felix Perumal, V G Prins L M P de Silva in cricket; Dep, Kitto, Stork, Satkunarajah, Dareeju, Nimal Fernando, Oswald Rajapaksa in athletics;, Nimal Leuke, Rohan Gunaratne, Majeed, Mahes Perera, Marso, Wijewardena in rugby; and Preena, Hajireen, Bernard Silva, Perimpanayagam, Scott and Harold Anthony in soccer. They were famous sportsmen who adorned the police uniform. I have omitted many other names for lack of space.

The Police is a service that works within the public gaze. Reputations with the public and performance are therefore critical ingredients that help to foster police public relations. I am not convinced that the service exploited the reputations which talented sports stars brought to the force to better enhance its public image. They were already ambassadors of public relations at the time of their entry to the police, being popularly known in the far reaches of the country.

Schemes to exploit sports stars in the police by engaging them with youth, particularly school children, may have paid dividends to the service. It is also possible that these outstanding sportsmen may not have received due recognition in the matter of postings and promotions. The absence of a “Hall of Fame” to remember sports legends may be proof of neglect.

Despite a history spanning 150 years, the service has chosen to consign it’s history to the dustbin. The absence of Archives and a Hall of Fame for the likes of outstanding legends

such as Sumith Liyanage, may be proof of the inability of the service to foster respect for their past greats.

I am sure that many officers of today are ignorant of names of stalwarts such as Osmund de Silva , Eleric Abeygoonewardene, Cyril Herath [uncompromising with interference], Sidney de Zoysa [DIG], and in sports, of legends such as Sumith Liyanage and Dharmasiri Weerakoon.

An aspect or element that deserves mention is that the words “subservience” and “submission” to unlawful dictates, were alien to the vocabulary of Sumith Liyanage.

So also was the case with many outstanding sportsmen who then joined the police. They were proud men confident of their leadership skills acquired in the playing fields and boxing rings, inspired to resist interference in their work from above.

A brief sketch of Sumith Liyanage’s record in boxing would merit reflection. He took to boxing like a duck to water at Ananda and Nalanda colleges. Whilst being a schoolboy,

he won his weight [feather] thrice at national meets. These were outstanding and exceptional achievements. Prior to nationals, he also won his weight in the Stubb Shield competitions for schools

A unique feature of his 12-year boxing career was that he remained undefeated, except once, in Sri Lanka. The National Selection Committee even made a strong case for him to be sent to the

Melbourne Olympics of 1956. After considerable deliberation, they ruled against his participation as he was only 19-years old. From school days to his retirement, he acquired fame for knocking

out opponents at Stubbs Shield, Amateur Boxing Association and National meets.

Sumith Liyanage was a household name in most parts of the country due to his ability to dispose of opponents through knockouts. The only defeat he suffered in his 12-year long boxing career was

after his return from Rome Olympics. Prior to announcing his retirement, he fought Malcolm Bulner, a rising star, and lost on points in a close fought bout.

Sumith boxed at a time when illustrious sportsmen had to work for a living in the state or private sector. Sports then was just a pastime. It is to the credit of Sumith, that he along with others of his like, were able to overcome hardships and inconveniences and yet perform outstandingly for the country.

Sport today, in contrast to what it wast then, is highly professional with massive financial rewards. Despite benefits, the danger in this mix is amply proved by specific cases where some sportsmen obsessed with money give second place to representing the country.

The life of Sumith Liyanage, both in his world of boxing and his professional career, were laced with pride, values, ethics and culture. He was therefore the complete or perfect legend in his favourite sport, boxing. He was also a renowned fast bowler in cricket, and a crack shot in pistol and rifle shooting. He had a natural flair for sports with boxing taking centre stage in his

The United States celebrated  250 years of freedom on the Fourth of July in spectacular style

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.