Macksons Solar sets new benchmark with largest rooftop installation

Industries and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handunneththi (centre) along with Macktiles Lanka Managing Director Mizver Makeen (right) and Macksons Holdings Chairman Milfer Makeen (extreme left) at the unveiling ceremony

In a landmark move for Sri Lanka’s renewable energy sector, Macksons Solar, in collaboration with Macktiles, unveiled the country’s largest rooftop solar project at the Macktiles Lanka Ltd., factory complex in Bandaragama.

This 10 megawatt (MW) installation comprises over 18,000 high efficiency solar panels, advanced inverter systems and state-of-the-art monitoring technology.

Together, they are expected to generate approximately 12 GWh of clean energy annually, while reducing approximately 8,000 tonnes of carbon emissions each year.

Spread across the extensive rooftop of the Macktiles manufacturing facility, the 10 MW solar system delivers renewable energy directly to the plant, significantly lowering its reliance on grid power while channelling surplus electricity to support a more sustainable national energy network.

Macksons Solar CEO Sajjaad Saliheen said: “This project is not just about size - it’s about vision, innovation and responsibility. We are proud to partner with Macktiles in leading Sri Lanka’s transition toward renewable energy. This 10 MW installation demonstrates how large-scale industries can embrace sustainability without compromising productivity or profitability.”

The official unveiling ceremony was graced by several distinguished guests, including Industries and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handunneththi as Chief Guest, along with Labour Minister and Finance and Planning Deputy Minister Dr. Anil Jayantha Fernando, Energy Deputy Minister M.I.M. Arkam, Kalutara District Member of Parliament Nandana Padmakumara and Millaniya Pradeshiya Sabha Vice Chairperson Jayasena Rodrigue.

Sri Lanka’s largest rooftop solar project at the Macktiles Lanka factory complex in Bandaragama

Macktiles continues to set benchmarks in sustainable manufacturing through initiatives like this, reinforcing its commitment to environmental responsibility.

Macktiles Lanka Managing Director Mizver Makeen said: “At Macktiles, we believe progress and sustainability must go hand in hand. This 10 MW solar project is a testament to our commitment to responsible growth and clean energy. Partnering with Macksons Solar enables us to set a benchmark for the manufacturing sector in Sri Lanka.”

Demonstrating the strength of Sri Lankan expertise, Macksons Solar’s in-house technical team led the full design, engineering, and commissioning of the project- a testament to the company’s ability to deliver renewable energy infrastructure of international standards.

With this milestone, Macksons Solar strengthens its position as a leader in Sri Lanka’s solar industry, supporting the country’s target of achieving 70% renewable energy by 2030.

“This 10-MW project represents what’s possible when innovation meets commitment. It’s a proud moment for both our teams- and a major leap towards a greener, energy-secure Sri Lanka,” added Saliheen.