Abans commissions 5 MW ground mounted solar plant with Rs. 1.2 b investment

Abans Group said it has commissioned a 5 MW ground mounted solar power plant, initiated by Cleantech Ltd, the integrated environmental solutions provider and sustainability driver of the group.

The ground-mounted power plant, spanning across 18.8 acres of land in Pallekele, Kandy District, strengthens the group’s long-term vision of advancing renewable energy infrastructure and supporting Sri Lanka’s transition toward energy security, economic resilience, and environmental sustainability.

Furthering the Abans legacy, Cleantech represents the group’s commitment to a cleaner, self-sufficient Sri Lanka. Since its inception, Cleantech has enabled more than just integrated environmental solutions and urban sanitation services, providing cutting-edge technology, and a reputation for reliability that mirrors the strength of the Abans brand itself, the company said.

Cleantech, a subsidiary of Abans Group has signed on to develop this ground mounted solar project in Pallekele, Kandy with the majority stake of 75% amounting to an investment of Rs. 1.2 billion. A 25% stake is owned by Clean Energy Pallekele Ltd.

Prior to this project, as part of its commitment to sustainable mobility and renewable energy, Cleantech had expanded its portfolio to include EV charging and rooftop solar solutions. Energique by Cleantech operates an EV fast charging facility, supporting the growing adoption of electric vehicles while creating a new sustainable business stream.

Cleantech’s green energy initiatives started modestly in 2024 when the company ventured into rooftop solar energy generation, with a rooftop Solar power system installed at DOK Solutions warehouse facility in Dagonna, Katunayake paving way for a much large-scale investment in Ground mounted solar later on.

The new power plant will significantly contribute to the national grid, helping to stabilise electricity supply while reducing dependence on fossil fuels. It is expected to power thousands of homes and businesses annually, lowering the nation’s carbon footprint and supporting Sri Lanka’s renewable energy targets for 2030.

Abans Group Managing Director Rusi Pestonjee said: “By diversifying our energy mix and embracing solar, we are helping Sri Lanka build resilience against power shortages and economic uncertainty. Through Cleantech, we are not only producing energy but empowering independence for households, businesses, and the nation. Therefore, this project goes far beyond an investment, it is a commitment to the nation’s progress, lighting the way toward a more self-reliant and sustainable Sri Lanka.”

With its proven financial stability, technical expertise, and island-wide operational presence, Abans Group remains open to strategic partnerships and investment opportunities that align with Sri Lanka’s renewable energy vision. This project marks the beginning of a broader portfolio of green investments envisioned under the Abans Group umbrella, reaffirming its role as a corporate leader in sustainable progress.

Founded by visionary entrepreneur Aban Pestonjee in 1968, Abans Group has grown into conglomerate with a diversified portfolio spanning retail, manufacturing, logistics, finance, real estate, hospitality, and environmental services.