‘Better to shoot Gnanasara Thera dead like Kudapola Thera’: Siridhamma Thera

Colombo, Oct. 7 (Daily Mirror) - It would be better to shoot Bodu Bala Sena General Secretary Ven. Galagoda Aththe Gnanasara Thera dead, as was done to Venerable Kudapola Thera, a prominent Buddhist monk and national patriot, Pitiduwe Siridhamma Thera, also known as Siri Samanthabhadra Thera, said today.

Addressing the media, Ven. Siridhamma Thera said the imprisonment of Ven. Gnanasara Thera was not a new sentence but an extension of an earlier court order.

He said rulers should follow the principles of the ‘Dasa Raja Dharma’, the ten moral and ethical duties prescribed in Buddhist teachings for just and righteous governance.

He particularly referred to ‘Khanti’ (patience/forbearance) and ‘Avirodhana’ (non-opposition/harmony), the final two principles of the Dasa Raja Dharma.

“The ruler should always be patient and should not oppose the people. If rulers uphold ‘Khanti’ and ‘Avirodhana’, most issues can be brought under control,” he said.

Ven. Siridhamma Thera said Ven. Gnanasara Thera had previously been imprisoned while wearing his monastic robes and urged authorities not to create unnecessary controversy over the matter.

He also criticised the handling of the issue during the tenure of former President Maithripala Sirisena, saying the President could have resolved the matter by examining the documents relating to the allegations against Ven. Gnanasara Thera.

“It is better to follow the ‘Dasa Raja Dharma’, which has continued as a principle of governance for thousands of years,” he said.

Buddhist monks had traditionally advised rulers on governance based on the Dasa Raja Dharma and would come forward when rulers went wrong, he said.

“Ven. Gnanasara Thera is not a criminal. He has never killed anyone or robbed anyone,” Ven. Siridhamma Thera said.

He said he accepted the court decision against Ven. Gnanasara Thera but added that the President had the opportunity to examine the accuracy of the documents and identify any shortcomings before considering a suitable pardon.

Kudapola Thera, who was a prominent Buddhist monk during the 1848 rebellion, was executed by a firing squad while wearing his monastic robes on August 26, 1848, near Bogambara Lake in Kandy.