Vista Essential Foods enters local spice market, unveils export ambitions

From left: Vista Essential Foods Managing Director Suhanya  Perera  Ockersz, Chairman Quintus Perera  and General Manager Nilmin Arsacularatne at the launching of its spice range at Hilton Colombo.

With worldwide demand increasing for authentic and high-quality spices, a new entrant to Sri Lanka’s food manufacturing and distribution scene has disclosed major plans for export market entry.

Launching seven of its flagship spice products to the local market in Colombo last week, Vista Essential Foods (Pvt) Ltd said it looks forward to gradually scale-up and enter export markets in the future, while establishing its presence locally.

“We have already received inquiries from Singapore, Malaysia, Azerbaijan, and Germany. It’s a very encouraging development at this stage. Compliance with international standards is key to enter these export markets, and there are certain globally recognised food safety and quality standards certifications such as the Brand Reputation through Compliance Global Standards (BRCGS), HACCP, FSSC 22000 (Food Safety System Certification 22000) etc essential to enter and get a solid footing particularly in European markets,” Vista Essential Foods Managing Director Suhanya  Perera  Ockersz  told Mirror Business.

BRCGS are global food safety standards that are heavily preferred or required by major European supermarkets and food processors, while HACCP is a mandatory food safety procedure required by EU law for all external food businesses. FSSC 22000 on the other hand is a core food safety management system standard widely accepted by major global markets because it has official recognition from the Global Food Safety Initiative (GFSI), the Managing Director explained.

Securing these certifications also gives solid proof of a company’s commitment to food safety and quality in the industry. For customers, these certifications and their systematic approach provide added assurance that processes are audited, risk management is systematic, and food safety is integrated into daily operations by the company. We are currently working on obtaining some of them, and our factory is being constructed in line with their requirements.  The certification obtaining process is stringent and would take about 6-8 months, she added.

Sri Lanka currently produces a wide variety of high-quality spices. According to the Export Development Board, the country exports around 30,000 tons of various kinds of spices annually, and over 90 percent of spice and allied products manufactured in Sri Lanka are consumed by the global food and beverage industry, the pharmaceutical industry, and the personal care products industry. In terms of market outlook, the local spices sector is projected to witness mixed growth rate patterns during 2025 to 2029. Accordingly, the growth rate begins at 8.89 percent in 2025, climbs to a high of 9.83 percent in 2026, and moderates to 9.81 percent by 2029.

Vista Essential Foods’ initial range of spice products includes Chilli Powder, Chilli Pieces, Curry Powder, Roasted Curry Powder, Roasted Chilli Powder, Turmeric Powder, and Pepper Powder.

Commenting on local spice brands and market competition, Chairman Quintus Perera said most of them are adulterated, and consumers are being misled by false advertising campaigns on the quality aspect. “At Vista Essential Foods, quality and product safety are paramount. We will be supplying 100 percent pure raw spices at a reasonable price, devoid of colouring, artificial flavours and preservatives. We will enforce strict standards with no compromise on natural flavour or purity, delivering the same world-class standards to both local and global consumers. When it comes to local competition, we see only two big-timers in the business, and we are well positioned and are backed by a well established network to compete with them. Though Vista is a new brand on the shelf, its foundation rests on a legacy spanning over seven decades in Sri Lanka’s food industry with its affiliation to the House of Uswatte. We will be initially aiming at capturing 5-10 percent of the local spice market worth Rs.2 billion,” the Chairman noted.

The company said it will be expanding into everyday food essentials, including jams, cordials and sauces in the long run.