Colombo Dockyard delivers “Misje Sakura”  – 9th eco-friendly hybrid bulk carrier to Norway

CDPLC MD/CEO Thimira Godakumbura (left) and Misje EcoBulk AS Norway Owner Roald Misje exchange protocol of delivery and acceptance

Colombo Dockyard PLC (CDPLC) recently delivered the ninth vessel of the 5000 DWT Eco Bulk Carrier series, named ‘Misje Sakura’ to Misje EcoBulk AS of Norway, well ahead of the contractual delivery date, marking completion of yet another milestone in this successful long-term collaboration.

Following the handover of the first vessel in September 2022, CDPLC has continued to deliver each vessel in the series with increasing quality and efficiency. The completion of ‘Misje Sakura’ once again demonstrates Colombo Dockyard’s ability to build world class ships to European owners, meeting European quality standards.

The delivery ceremony was graced by the Owner Roald Misje, CFO Alina Printseva, Site Manager Thusitha Herath, and Site Superintendents Venura Wanasinghe and Prince Jawahar all from Misje EcoBulk.

Representatives from DNV comprised of the Country Manager Saman A. Kumarasinghe and Surveyor Gishan Dias. The Authorised Nautical Inspector Captain Nish Wijayakulathilaka participated in representing the Bahamas Maritime Authority.  From CDPLC, the event was led by MD/CEO Thimira Godakumbura who officially handed over the vessel to the Owner in the presence of the senior management and staff of Colombo Dockyard.

The 89.95m DNV-classed Eco Bulker was conceptualised by Wartsila Ship Design Norway, with detailed design work carried out by CDPLC’s skilled in-house design team. In line with the latest trends in sustainable shipping, the vessel is equipped with an advanced Energy Storage Battery System (ESS) for Electric Hybrid Propulsion, complementing the conventional diesel propulsion system to enhance operational performance and reduce environmental impact.The successful delivery of “Misje Sakura” reaffirms Colombo Dockyard’s reputation as a reliable shipbuilder of high-quality, eco-friendly vessels for discerning global clients.

CDPLC said it continuously proves its excellence through securing and successful execution of shipbuilding projects worldwide and is the front runner of Sri Lankan industrialisation. CDPLC also contributes heavily to the national export earnings from the shipbuilding sector with much needed foreign currency to the Sri Lankan economy and plays a leading role in uplifting and driving the maritime development strategy of Sri Lanka.

From left: CDPLC GM – Production K.N.G.W. Kariyawasam, Misje Site Superintendent Venura Wanasinghe, CFO Alina Printseva, Misje EcoBulk Owner Roald Misje, CDPLC MD/CEO Master of Vessel Thimira Godakumbura, Misje Site Manager Thusitha Herath, AGM (Special Projects)/Project Manager S.M.S.B. Serasinghe, Misje Site Superintendent Prince Jawahar

Misje EcoBulk AS Norway Owner Roald Misje breaking the milk pot and blessing the vessel