A vital issue buried in political rhetoric

Politics and conflicts are as inseparable as conjoined twins. However, conflicts are not inherently negative or harmful. They, if handled properly, promote creativity and innovation, with disagreements driving people to reconsider assumptions and propose fresh ideas and make better decisions collectively, as in advanced democracies. If mismanaged, they could lead to bitter acrimony and clashes, paving the way for binary approaches to contentious issues, thereby making it well-nigh impossible to adopt consensual solutions, as Sri Lanka’s experience since Independence has shown.

The ongoing budget debate, which is now at the committee stage, has descended into verbal battles, if not slanging matches, between the government and the Opposition. The NPP/JVP is apparently labouring under the misconception that Budget 2026 is flawless, and therefore needs no revision. The Opposition would have the public believe that the budget is not worth the paper it is written on, and President Anura Kumara Dissanayake wasted four and a half hours of parliamentary time by presenting it. The two sides hardly see eye to eye on anything in the budget. They are clashing, apparently unconcerned about the prospect of a recurrence of the economic crisis, which only a truly national effort can resolve once and for all.

On Saturday, SJB MP Dayasiri Jayasekera and some government MPs clashed in Parliament over an increase in budgetary allocations for the President. Jayasekera said funds allocated under President Dissanayake’s expenditure head had risen to as much as Rs. 12 billion, and it was the highest ever budgetary allocation for a President. That amount included allocations for ‘Clean Sri Lanka’ programme as well, the government MPs said. Jayasekera claimed President Dissanayake’s security convoy consisted of more than 20 vehicles, and Prime Minister Harini Amarasuriya’s security personnel also used an equal number of vehicles, although the NPP had criticised the previous Presidents for such costly security arrangements. Minister of Public Security Ananda Wijepala denied Jayasekera’s claim.

The real issue is not the amount of funds allocated for the President or the size of the President’s security contingent or the number of the President’s foreign trips. Instead, it is why the NPP has chosen to remain silent on its solemn pledge to abolish the executive presidency. The NPP manifesto, “A thriving nation: A beautiful life” promises to abolish the executive presidency and restore the Westminster system.

The JVP campaigned really hard against the executive presidency while in opposition. In the late 1980s, it even plunged the country into a bloodbath and destroyed public assets worth billions of rupees in a bid to have the executive presidency done away with, among other things. Thereafter, it made the abolition of the executive presidency a condition for coalescing with the SLFP and joining the UPFA government in 2004. It backed Mahinda Rajapaksa in the 2005 presidential race on the strict condition that he would introduce a new Constitution, doing away with the executive presidency. Rajapaksa reneged on that promise, and the JVP thereafter backed Maithripala Sirisena, who pledged to restore the parliamentary system, and helped him become the President. His promise also went unfulfilled. Now that the JVP has been ensconced in power for one year with a two-thirds majority in Parliament, it can take action to fulfil its pledge to scrap the executive presidency. But it pretends that it never made such a promise!

November is the month when the JVP commemorates its leaders and cadres, killed during its second abortive uprising (1987-1990). JVP leader Rohana Wijeweera, other party stalwarts and rank and file died in an armed struggle against Indian expansionism, the 13th Amendment, the Provincial Council (PC) system, the executive presidency, the open economy, etc. But three and a half decades later, the JVP is pandering to the whims and fancies of India and has embraced neoliberal economic policies, which it once condemned vehemently. It has also undertaken to hold the delayed PC polls. The slain JVP members would spin in their graves if they knew of the present-day party leaders’ volte face on the goals for which they met violent deaths at the hands of counterterrorism operatives.

Some SJB MPs have faulted President Dissanayake for having evaded the NPP’s promise to introduce a new Constitution, in his budget speech. Similarly, the Opposition has not remained intensely focused on this vital issue, which has got buried in political rhetoric.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.