India–Sri Lanka Business Forum highlights new momentum in trade, investment and connectivity

From left: Manish Mohan, Vishal Kamat, Anurag Agarwal, Dr. Rajesh Ravindra Gawande, Mahishini Colonne, Krishan Balendra, Duminda Hulangamuwa, Priyanga Wickramasinghe, and Shiran Fernando

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, in partnership with the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), organised the India–Sri Lanka Business Forum: Partnering in Sri Lanka’s Growth and Investment and the CII – Ceylon Chamber CEOs Interaction in Mumbai on 13 May. The events brought together senior government representatives, industry leaders, policymakers, and business delegates from India and Sri Lanka to deepen economic engagement and explore new avenues for cooperation across priority sectors.

The discussions reflected growing optimism about India-Sri Lanka economic relations and focused on expanding collaboration in trade, investments, connectivity, tourism, renewable energy, logistics, digital transformation, infrastructure, healthcare, education, manufacturing, and technology.

Participants included High Commissioner of Sri Lanka to India Mahishini Colonne,  Senior Economic Adviser to the President of Sri Lanka Duminda Hulangamuwa, Government of Maharashtra, Secretary – Protocol, FDI, Diaspora and Outreach, and Chief of Protocol Dr. Rajesh Ravindra Gawande, Consul General of Sri Lanka in Mumbai Priyanga Wickramasinghe, The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce Chairperson and John Keells Holdings PLC Chairperson Krishan Balendra, CII Western Region Sub-committee on International Trade and Investment Co-Chairman and Polycab India Ltd., Chief Executive Officer Anurag Agarwal, CII Western Region Sub-Committee on Tourism and Hospitality Chairman and Kamat Hotels India Ltd., Executive Director Vishal Kamat, Ceylon Chamber Vice Chairperson and Standard Chartered Bank Sri Lanka CEO Bingumal Thewarathanthti, Ceylon Chamber Deputy Vice Chairperson and Hirdaramani Group Chairman Vinod Hirdaramani and Ceylon Chamber Secretary General and CEO Shiran Fernando.

Welcoming the delegates, Anurag Agarwal, highlighted the growing momentum in India–Sri Lanka economic relations and the emergence of future-oriented sectors driving bilateral cooperation.

He noted that India and Sri Lanka are at an important phase of economic collaboration, where connectivity, investments, innovation, and sustainable partnerships are creating new opportunities for shared growth. He further emphasised the significant potential for deeper engagement in sectors such as renewable energy, tourism, ICT, logistics, digital services, healthcare, manufacturing, education, and infrastructure.

Agarwal also stated that improved maritime connectivity, ferry services, enhanced air links, and digital payment integration are strengthening ease of doing business and regional commerce. He reiterated CII’s commitment towards facilitating greater business-to-business engagement, investment partnerships, and sectoral cooperation between India and Sri Lanka.

The High Commissioner of Sri Lanka to India Mahishini Colonne said, “The sectors represented here – renewable energy, infrastructure, technology, tourism, financial services, logistics, manufacturing and digital innovation – reflect where the next phase of India-Sri Lanka economic cooperation will increasingly be shaped. This is not simply about increasing trade volumes. It is about building long-term partnerships, joint ventures, regional value chains, technology collaborations, skills partnership and stronger private sector connectivity between our two countries.”

Senior Economic Adviser to the President of Sri Lanka Duminda Hulangamuwa said, “Sri Lanka has shifted from economic stability to growth. As we shift into a sustainable growth path, India will be a key partner in our efforts to drive trade, investment and tourism. We invite investment from India into high growth sectors such as transport and logistics, digital services, tourism and high-value manufacturing.”

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce Chairperson and John Keells Holdings PLC Chairperson Krishan Balendra said, “At the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, we see our role as going beyond facilitation. We aim to be an active catalyst and bridge, bringing together businesses, enabling partnerships, and supporting investment flows that contribute meaningfully to Sri Lanka’s economic transformation. Sri Lanka is now pivoting towards a growth oriented future. In this context, India is not just a neighbour, but a critical partner.”

The discussions during the forum reflected strong optimism regarding the future of India-Sri Lanka economic relations and highlighted opportunities arising from enhanced maritime and air connectivity, digital payment systems, energy cooperation, and logistics integration. The role of tourism, people-to-people linkages, skilling, sustainability, and technology partnerships also featured prominently during the deliberations.

The forum witnessed active participation from industry leaders representing sectors including infrastructure, hospitality, logistics, renewable energy, pharmaceuticals, ICT, manufacturing, financial services, and trade facilitation. Business networking interactions and B2B engagements enabled delegates to explore potential collaborations and investment opportunities.

Delivering the concluding remarks, CII Western Region Sub-Committee on Tourism and Hospitality Chairman and Kamat Hotels India Ltd., Executive Director Vishal Kamat, stated that the India–Sri Lanka partnership is entering a new era driven by trust, resilience, connectivity, and shared regional aspirations. He underlined the important role of industry in translating opportunities into actionable partnerships and reaffirmed CII’s commitment towards supporting sustained economic engagement between both countries through policy advocacy, business delegations, CEO interactions, and investment facilitation initiatives.

The India–Sri Lanka Business Forum concluded with strong optimism regarding the future of India-Sri Lanka economic relations and a shared commitment to deepen private sector engagements, strengthen regional connectivity and build long-term strategic partnerships that contribute to inclusive and sustainable regional growth.