“Ways of Looking” – A lecture on Martin Wickramasinghe at Sapumal Foundation

“Ways of Looking: Martin Wickramasinghe and the Currents of Sri Lankan Art”, a lecture on Martin Wickramasinghe’s writings on art and culture, will unveil at The Garden Gallery at the Sapumal Foundation on Tuesday, 31 March 2026 from 04.45 pm.

Organized by the Martin Wickramasinghe Trust, the lecture focuses on Wickramasinghe’s evolving views on art history in the context of early 20th century Sri Lanka and South Asia. It will be presented by Uditha Devapriya. Opening remarks will be given by Avishka Mario Senewiratne, while closing remarks will be given by Hasini Haputhanthri. The session will be moderated by Samindi Warnasooriya of the Open University.

Though not himself an artist, Wickramasinghe commented on art, including on painting. During his most formative years, a number of scholars explored these aspects of Sri Lankan and South Asian society. Ananda Coomaraswamy’s Mediaeval Sinhalese Art was published just two years after Wickramasinghe came to Colombo. In Colombo, he came across the work of scholars like E. B. Havell and Alfred Foucher. He reflected on their writings and formed his views on the subjects they explored. By the end of his life, his reputation as a cultural critic had grown so much that no fewer than six modern artists – including Harry Pieris, Richard Gabriel, and David Paynter – had drawn him.

The lecture at the Sapumal Foundation traces his interest in art to his early life in Koggala and his immersion in art history. It assesses his critiques of scholars of Sri Lankan and South Asian art. Finally, it appraises his reputation as a leading literary figure against the backdrop of cultural modernism in Sri Lanka and in South Asia.

“Ways of Looking” marks the final lecture in a series that were planned and organized by the Wickramasinghe Trust last year. Beginning with a webinar at the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS) in the UK and a presentation at the India International Centre in New Delhi in November 2025, the lectures involved sessions at Lakmahal Community Library, the Social Scientists’ Association, and the International Centre for Ethnic Studies.

These explored diverse aspects to Wickramasinghe’s life, work, and thought, focusing on views on subjects like culture, society, politics, and anthropology. Devapriya is also involved in a major study of Martin Wickramasinghe, slated for review and publication this year. Incorporating primary archive material and interviews with scholars and acquaintances of Wickramasinghe, the book marks a culmination to nearly two years of research into one of Sri Lanka’s most iconic literary and cultural figures.

For more information on the lecture, contact Uditha via email at or WhatsApp and phone at (+94)716419646.

One Heart, One Voice – A choral concert presented by the Lanka Alzheimer’s Foundation

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.