Looking back on living and workingin four countries

Entry through Heathrow was a dream thanks to a Jamaican who toppled an immigration official from his lofty perch

I was very fortunate to work in Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and Brunei before accepting a post in Paris in 2001. What follows are some interesting, including some humorous,

moments in the three South East Asian countries and at the Heathrow Airport. It was my first visit to London in 1978 during my stay in the Netherlands that made me decide to work in Malaysia from

My first visit to London was during my post-graduate days in the Netherlands. I was at University of Delft in a city which was nearer to Rotterdam than Amsterdam. During the first winter break, I decided to cross over to the UK. For us ex-colonials, brought up in a quasi-colonial environment in school and steeped in a western cultural milieu, England was the mother-country. Thus, visiting the place, for many of us of that era, was like going to Mecca for Muslims.

I went to London at the beginning of the third week in December of 1978. It was cold in Rotterdam and the airport was covered in snow. I was glad to leave but only to land 45 minutes later at Heathrow which was even bleaker and deeper in snow than the place I took-off from. It was just four o’clock in the afternoon and already dark and foreboding. So, this, I thought, is the mother-country. And what a contrast to the sunny Sri Lanka and the balmy beach of Mount Lavinia where I hail from!

Heathrow airport was well-lit, but dilapidated compared to Schiphol, the international airport in Amsterdam and the premier airport in the world at the time. From 2010 Changi Airport has become the leading airport for efficiency and layout. James Callaghan was Prime Minister in the UK at the time. But, the Labour Party was in disarray and Margret Thatcher, the Iron Lady, was about to come to power “to fix things”.

One can, actually, sense when a country was on the verge of changing government. I had seen this in 1977 back in Sri Lanka when the Sirimavo Bandaranaike government was coming to an end. I was also fortunate to see it in Australia in 2007 and 2022 respectively when the ruling Liberals were overrun by Labor. The difference in spelling is due to Australian Labor adopting the USA style of spelling. And in that context word Labor to USA came from the French spelling format.

Walking down the long aisles of Heathrow with a Sri Lankan passport to enter England for the very first time was rather unnerving, even before Tamil refugees started entering the UK, as a mass exodus after the 1983 riots. Even before that, a Sri Lankan passport did not have much respect at international airports as a British or an American passport. Just as much as the currency of the country which was not accepted anywhere in the world other than in India and that too at a heavily discounted rate.

What struck me most at Heathrow while waiting in the immigration queue, was the presence of Indian and African (probably West Indian) staff in large numbers. At Rotterdam and Schiphol airports, other than an odd Indonesian or Surinamese, the staff was predominantly white. But here, in the mother country of a former empire where the sun never set, those who were manning the entry gates were those from the ex-colonies. They were the ones who decided, on the face of a passport, who shall enter and who would be barred.

Then of course, there was an equal number of Indians and Africans engaged in what is derogatorily referred to as menial tasks. Obtaining a visa to enter Britain from the UK Visa office in Rotterdam was challenging. Probably this was more so for Asians and Africans than those from Europe or the US. Given the hassles experienced at the UK Visa office, I was naturally apprehensive of the treatments I might receive on entering.

But it was not to be. By sheer coincidence, I was right behind a person who I am sure made my entry a breeze. He was an immaculately dressed man, tall and athletic in the manner of Viv Richards and Garry Sobers. He was in a neat well-cut suit carrying a briefcase. Others in the queue, including myself, were shabbily dressed compared to him. I was in my only suit.

The officer behind the counter was one of the few white men at the immigration counters. When the West Indian fronted up to the counter, the officer asked in one of those unpleasant school master tones that a Britisher can assume when required:

“Why are you visiting Britain?” “On business,” replied the West Indian. “Have you got money?” At this, the prospective visitor pulled out his wallet, which was thick with hundred-pound notes. The kind of notes in such a large quantity that the man behind the counter would see only if he had backed a winner at the Derby. Then, not satisfied with this declaration of assets, the West Indian opened his briefcase and showed thick pads of what presumably were traveller’s cheques. From where I stood, I could see the Hundred Pound sign on their cover.

Obviously, the officer, even in a snarly voice, was asking routine questions he had been trained to ask from ‘non-white’ visitors to the country. This was in 1978 and not very long after the inflammatory “Rivers of Blood” speech by Enoch Powell in the British Parliament. The Brits were told to be wary of Asian and African migration to the UK.

What the Immigration Officer next asked touched a raw nerve in the West Indian.

“Are you trying to settle down in the UK?” The West Indian kept his cool. If he was offended, he did not show it. But his words were telling.

“Hey Maarn!! Look out of the window. You see that gloomy dark weather? Who wants to permanently live here, bloody cold and grey!” And he continued, “I come here at least three times a year; See my passport Maarn. I live in sunny Jamaica and I am down here on business. Only fools settle down here”.

The officer knew he was beaten. His manners changed. Tell you what, these English have that remarkable ability, like a chameleon changing colour, to change instantly from being nasty to pleasant when beaten. Turning many pages of the passport to find a blank page, the officer graciously stamped the passport with a wink at the passenger.

And, here was I, a first-time visitor to England, fronting up to the same Immigration Officer, expecting a barrage of questions. I was not on business. I hardly had a fraction of the money the West Indian had. And, I was to tell the officer that I was here on holiday and expect him to believe me. However, luck was on my side; Providence, perhaps, made the West Indian to face up to this offensive Immigration Officer ahead of me and to bring him down to earth from his high pedestal on which he was literally perched.

He looked at me, then at my first ever Sri Lankan passport, turned the first three pages which had just five stamps. And, without any questions he said, “Welcome to London” and stamped the fourth page of the passport.

It was that easy thanks, no doubt, to the West Indian. And the Customs check was easy too, as I was traveling light and did not have any spices in my luggage coming from the Netherlands. It was just the opposite of what I experienced on my entry to Amsterdam, six months previously.

I was glad to find at the “Arrivals” my former work colleague in Sri Lanka at St Anthony’s Industries in Dematagoda, Denis Azariah, and another visitor to London from Colombo, Ashu (ASK) Fernando to greet me. Ashu was my classmate from 1957 at school.

Getting to London for me was easy in the shadow of that Jamaican. The three of us had a good drink at Denis’s house in Clapham where I was to stay for a few days. Ironically, the majority of residents in Clapham were of West Indian origin as I was to find out later. Denis is still resident in the UK, whilst Ashu, sadly, is no more dying at the relatively young age of 55.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.