AKD says Sri Lanka remains grateful for support extended by US and other friendly nations

Visiting US Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Allison Hooker calls on President Dissanayake

Expresses confidence in Sri Lanka’s recovery under President Dissanayake’s leadership

The visiting US Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Allison Hooker yesterday expressed her confidence in President Anura Kumara Dissanayake’s leadership in steering Sri Lanka’s recovery and rebuilding efforts.

During a courtesy call on President Dissanayake, she affirmed that the United States stands ready to provide any necessary support to assist Sri Lanka’s recovery.

Hooker also conveyed her condolences to the families of the victims of the disaster and expressed satisfaction at being able to extend assistance during this challenging period.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake conveyed his appreciation for the assistance provided by the President of the United States and the government in dispatching various relief teams to the country during this challenging period. The President also acknowledged the sincere support offered to Sri Lanka by all friendly nations globally, including the United States.

President Dissanayake highlighted that Sri Lanka encountered this disaster while the nation’s economy was on the path to stabilisation and economic indicators were showing improvement. He emphasised the need for future focus on enhancing the livelihoods of those affected and on the long-term development of infrastructure facilities.

The President stated that restoring infrastructure, including highways and railways, as well as key income sources such as agriculture, livestock and small to medium-sized enterprises, which have been devastated by floods and landslides, will require time. He also expressed the expectation of support from all friendly nations in this effort.

The Under Secretary of State emphasised that the United States has drawn its attention to restarting discussions regarding US tariffs. Additionally, she expressed support for enhancing tourism between the United States and Sri Lanka, as well as for the growth of trade and maritime operations between the two nations. Furthermore, she highlighted U.S. support for Sri Lanka’s initiatives to combat drug-related issues.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake noted that a significant number of American tourists have visited the country recently and that Sri Lanka anticipates a continued increase in such arrivals. He acknowledged the support of the U.S. government in assisting the Sri Lankan people to overcome the ongoing disaster and improve their quality of life.

The meeting was attended by Labour Minister and Finance and Planning Deputy Minister Dr. Anil Jayantha Fernando, Treasury Secretary Dr. Harshana Suriyapperuma and members of the US diplomatic mission, including US Ambassador to Sri Lanka Julie Chang.

Separately, the US Embassy said Hooker met with Sri Lankan counterparts to discuss a wide range of bilateral issues, focused on deepening economic and commercial ties, strengthening defence cooperation, and supporting Sri Lanka’s economic and maritime sovereignty.

It said the two countries share a strong and enduring partnership rooted in mutual commitment to regional security, economic growth, and prosperity for their peoples. “Through close cooperation on defence, trade, and maritime security, we are working together to advance a free, open, and resilient Indo-Pacific region,” it said.

“As we continue to build on our strategic partnership, the United States also stands with the people of Sri Lanka as they respond to the devastating impacts of Cyclone Ditwah. We remain committed to working together to address both immediate challenges and long-term opportunities for our two nations, reflecting our ongoing commitment to the US-Sri Lanka partnership.”