LIIN catalyses next wave of impact investment in Sri Lanka

On October 22, 2025, the Lanka Impact Investment Network (LIIN), announced several key initiatives signaling the dawn of a transformative era in the Sri Lanka’s economy, entrepreneurial ecosystem, and impact investment landscape. LIIN released the country’s first-ever impact investment landscape study; established the country’s first Social Entrepreneurial Fund (SEF); unveiled a new reality TV series entitled On Eagle’s Wings; and announced Sri Lanka’s inaugural Impact Investment Summit, taking place February 12th 2026.

In room full of partners, sponsors and stakeholders in downtown Colombo, LIIN shared key findings of the country’s first-ever impact investment landscape study, made possible with the World University Service of Canada and funded by the Government of Canada. The study comes at a critical time as the country looks to rebuild and attract new types of capital. The study is the result of collaboration across multiple partners, local institutions, development finance institutions (DFIs), and development organizations, all aligned in a shared goal: to make Sri Lanka an attractive and credible destination for impact investors.

. Camelia - Adriana BUCATARIU, Project Manager, Circular Economy in the Food Sector (CIRCULAR) Project, Sri Lanka

Another key initiative announced by LIIN during the evening: the establishment of the Social Enterprise Fund (SEF).  The SEF will facilitate the inflow of global impact capital and sustainability finance to Sri Lanka. Created in partnership between the Lanka Impact Investing Network (LIIN), and the UNDP, SEF invests in businesses with strong growth potential and a clear commitment to making positive social and environmental impacts. SEF invests in companies which are moving into the acceleration phase from the incubation stage, and companies are given an investment and

access to a mentorship network along with much needed capacity building workshops that maximizes their growth.

After having successfully facilitated investments in 37 enterprises through the former and widely popular Ath Pavura TV reality show, LIIN also celebrated the launch of their upcoming reality TV series called On Eagle’s Wings. OEW will provide a platform for entrepreneurs to pitch their impact-driven businesses to potential investors, with a focus on sectors like climate adaptation, women led and inclusive businesses, and social impact. The OEW program is aiming to empower 400+ local social impact enterprises.

Chandula Abeywickerma, Founder & Chairman of the LIIN set the scene for the audience introducing the Impact Investment Summit 2026, noting that while impact investments and green financing are relatively new concepts in Sri Lanka, developed economies have been prioritizing them for the past 25 years.

Nurturing genuine entrepreneurship in a country depends on the key stakeholders in the investment, banking and finance as well as the public and private sectors to see the bigger picture.  It requires us to see eye-to-eye in economic empowerment of impact entrepreneurs and in creating access to equity investment, responsible debt and catalytic funding”

The inaugural Lanka Impact Investment Summit 2026 will take place at the Shangri-La Colombo, February 12, 2026, including an Executive Immersion Program on Impact Investing on February 10-11, 2026.  Register now at: https://impactsummit.lk/

Presenters at the briefing thoughtfully pieced together the four initiatives that together show the big picture and the potential of impact investing in Sri Lanka. The recommendations set out in the Impact Investment Landscape Study will help bridge gaps and chart a more inclusive and resilient future in Sri Lanka. The report is a first in providing a comprehensive mapping of the opportunities, challenges, and pathways to unlock private capital. The Social Enterprise Fund and On Eagles Wings reality show slated for next year are grounded in the principles of promoting social entrepreneurship that create positive environmental impact and enhance inclusion of women and the next generation. And the inaugural Lanka Impact Investment Summit 2026 represents years of ground work and will open the doors to shared knowledge, awareness and understanding. It will be a place where impact investment emerges as a transformative financial approach, and the future of business that aligns financial returns with measurable improvements in well-being and equity.

LIIN extended its gratitude to all the integral partners and sponsors with whom LIIN is collaboratively paving the way forward and pioneering these initiatives.

For more information about LIIN and these initiatives, go to: www.liin.lk

The Lanka Impact Investing Network (LIIN) aims to create a sustainable and inclusive economy in Sri Lanka by facilitating impact investments that generate social and environmental benefits alongside financial returns.