Climate issues increasingly sidelined as arms race intensifies

Increasingly countries of Asia are falling victim to environmental crises and going forward it is hoped that this question of the first importance will come to be investigated with greater thoroughness by the scientific community worldwide. It should be seen as no accident that some major countries of Southeast Asia and now Sri Lanka are suffering the worst of climate change issues and one area that needs further probing is the link between the arms race and these aggravating climate change traumas.

Of paramount importance is the escalating arms spending at present by the world’s major powers and their allies. It is common knowledge that the international weapons industry is a major factor in the aggravation of global warming and by conservative estimates the contribution of the world’s arms industry to greenhouse gas emissions, for example, is approximately 5.5 percent. It goes without saying that global warming would only intensify in proportion to which the present armed conflicts continue to rage, considering that the arms manufacturing process is a major causative factor in the emission of excessive heat, besides other elements that negatively impact the natural environment.

The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) disclosed some of the most thought-provoking statistics in this regard. It is on record that revenues derived from weapons and military services by the world’s 100 largest arms-producing companies ‘reached a record $679 billion in 2024’. Companies based in Europe and the US were seen as leading from the front in the globe-wide revenue-extraction resulting from the escalation of such arms sales. Besides, the combined arms revenues of weapons manufacturers featuring among the topmost of these enterprises grew by 3.8 percent in 2024 to reach $334 billion, it is reported.

It is plain to see that unresolved conflicts and wars and steeply rising revenues from arms sales are major causative factors in the aggravation of climate change questions. Unfortunately for peace-loving sections of the world the prospects of diminishing the determining influence of these factors in climate change aggravation and consequently environmental disasters, are at present dim. This is on account of the fact that major states and their weapons manufacturers are standing to gain from the present state of things in relation to conflict and the environment.

While it is plain to see how arms manufacturers would stand to gain from this situation, the countries concerned would, on the other hand, lose badly if the operations of their arms industries are in any way hampered. For one, the relevant states would lose tax revenue as a consequence and for another, the work force concerned would be rendered unemployed. There is then too much at stake for the big military powers.

Accordingly, a blind eye will be turned on climate change and its consequences by the world’s most influential states with the consequence that environment related deliberations in major international forums, including the relevant UN agencies, would be gravely hampered. COP30 has just borne this out. Major decisions in the latter talks were no doubt taken, but nothing concrete was agreed upon to hold the major Western powers and their arms manufacturers in any way accountable for the climate harm being visited on the developing world as a consequence of their profit-oriented, self-empowering operations.

Moreover, it was not clear whether countries that do not adhere in future to the 1.5C ‘warming limit’ , as set out in the COP30 Mission Statement, would in any way be held accountable. Specifically, how would the biggest offenders in this respect, the major industrial powers of the West, be held accountable for violating this limit?

The above questions and more point to the necessity for the global South in particular to acquire the capability and power to work unchallenged towards meeting their just needs in the environment field and other areas of vital national and international interest. In other words, the South would need to re-visit the issues in the North-South Dialogue of the sixties and seventies. It would need to work out as to how the international power balance could be changed in its favour, since currently it is the North that possesses the bulk of global power and influence.

The developing world holds the majority in the UN General Assembly and some allied institutions but without substantive executive power it cannot do much to mould the current global power balance in its favour. Nor would a strong alignment with the BRICS grouping prove beneficial because within the BRICS fold are some international law violators who very much depend on their armed might.

One choice is for the majority of the Southern countries to align with states within their grouping who are leading democracies and notable ‘Swing States’; that is, democratic countries that wield tangible power and influence in the councils of the world. Two such states are India and South Africa. The latter’s voice cannot be easily overlooked by the big powers since they wield decisive influence in international affairs.

Accordingly, we in the South need to see another substantial in-gathering of the South, on the lines of those forums of the developing world that were formed in the sixties and seventies decades to further its legitimate interests. The Non-aligned Movement (NAM) could be made the base for this renewed coming together of the South. In fact, NAM has not outlived its usefulness.

The Donald Trump administration, which is no respecter of environmental concerns, should be compelled by a reunited, revitalized South to see that it would be in the interests of the US and the West to ensure the well-being of the developing world. For instance, how could there be sustained and sizeable markets in the South for Western goods and services, if Southern underdevelopment is perpetuated as a result of frequently occurring environmental debacles and wars?

Besides, the US and other major military powers of the West need to be made to perceive that durable peace within their borders would only be possible if the wars and conflicts of the world are peacefully resolved. For instance, illegal migration is an explosive political issue in many Western states. Such migration is a result, among other factors, of ongoing conflicts and wars within Southern countries and Western arms sales are instrumental in keeping these conflicts raging. There is no escaping the conclusion that a thriving and uncontrolled arms industry would be in the interests of none. There is no alternative as well to the facilitation of peace worldwide by the major powers of the North and South.

When the Waters Rise: Floods, Fear and the ancient survivors of Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.