Hanthana in flames: Fighting to preserve Sri Lanka’s ecological treasure

Sri Lanka is an island with rich biodiversity and lush landscape, home to a remarkable fauna and flora. Yet, these natural treasures are under a growing threat from human-caused wildfires, which destroy forests, endanger life and disrupt local communities. Despite the legal protection given to forests, the existing gaps and regulatory weaknesses often make ecosystems vulnerable.

In January 2020, a fire broke out in the upper part of Sarasavigama near the Hanthana Environmental Area, destroying around 12 acres of land. Recently, on 5th and 19th February 2025, fires erupted near Mahakanda, Galaha, on the western slopes of the Hanthana area. These incidents highlight the growing concern over the increasing frequency of wildfires in a protected forest region of Sri Lanka.

The Hanthana Mountain Range, situated in the Central Province, within the Kandy District, covers approximately 38.56 square kilometers. The Hanthana area serves as a critical watershed for the Mahaweli River. The area is rich in biodiversity with over 200 plant species, including various orchids and ferns, 17 of which are classified as endangered. The area is also home to 120 bird species and several mammals such as the fishing cat, leopard, mongoose, and wild boar, highlighting its biodiversity (Central Province Tourism Department, 2022). Hanthana is also a hub for nature-based activities like hiking, camping, and bird-watching, attracting both locals and foreigners.

In recognition of its ecological and environmental value, the Hanthana Environmental Protection Area was declared BY Gazette Notification No. 1641/28 on 17 February 2010, by the Minister of Environment and Natural Resources, under the National Environmental Act No.47 of 1980.

Wildfires are not uncommon in Hanthana. During dry months, particularly January, February and March, fires frequently erupt across the area. In a tropical island like Sri Lanka, natural wildfires are rare. So, these fires are believed to be a result of human activities. According to residents of Mahakanda, Sarasavigama, near Hanthana, many of the wildfires are either deliberately set to hunt animals, caused by travellers carelessly discarding burning beedi or cigarette ends or ignited to clear land and grow new grass for cattle.

It is not easy to stop the spread of the fire once it begins. Once a wildfire erupts, when a complaint is made by a local community, the Police, the Army, the Civil Security Force, the Disaster Management Centre, the central environmental authority and citizens all join efforts to extinguish the flames. However, even though they make collective attempts, it is extremely difficult to control the fire. In many cases, fire spreads quickly even before emergency teams can reach the affected area in Hanthana. In reality, when wildfires erupt, the authorities or emergency teams intervene primarily if the fire poses a threat to houses, human life and properties, rather than solely to protect the environment. Also, when fires broke out in Hanthana, firefighters often lack the necessary equipment to prevent the spread of fires, forcing them to wait for the flames to subside on their own.

Most importantly, lighting a fire or causing a fire to spread in an environmental protection area is an offence under the Forest (Amendment) Act No.56 of 2009. Such an offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or a fine not less than Rs. 5000 and not more than Rs. 50000 or both. Also, legal provisions exist to recover the damages caused to the forest. However, there are significant questions about the extent to which legal action can be taken against those responsible for causing wildfires in Hanthana and how far authorities can go in arresting them.

“We can make an arrest when people cut down trees, especially because reports are made by people due to the noise of the machines being used. But it is much harder to arrest anyone for causing wildfires in Hanthana. The responsible individuals often lived near the forest, and with so many people in the area, identifying them is difficult. Gathering enough evidence to prosecute is a challenge,” said K.H.S.O. Kariyawasam, Additional Forest Officer in Kandy District. He emphasized that their main focus is raising awareness and urging the public to avoid starting fires, with one key prevention strategy being the creation of  10-meter wildfire belts cleared around forest edges.

Ultimately, it is clear that despite Hanthana being designated as an environmental protection area with laws intended to regulate human activities and protect its nature, wildfires continue to pose a threat. This highlights a significant legal gap, as practical difficulties such as prosecuting those accountable limit the enforcement of existing laws. True protection of Hanthana, therefore, depends not only on the law but also on the active participation of the community, by avoiding careless actions that could ignite fires, reporting wildfire incidents to the authorities and supporting conservation efforts. The government also bears a huge responsibility to establish a comprehensive system to address illegal wildfires, one that unites all the relevant authorities like the Forest department, the Central environmental authority and prioritizes studying wildfires.

Protecting the Hanthana Environmental Protection Area, indeed, any forest in Sri Lanka is important at a time when the country is witnessing a significant loss of green cover, primarily due to human activities. Efforts to restore, protect and preserve those treasures are essential not only to maintain their rich biodiversity and ecological balance but also for safeguarding the well-being of surrounding communities for both present and future generations. It’s our duty as citizens of Sri Lanka and dependents of the environment.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.