Dipped Products’ 50th year  focuses on regional healthcare,  education and community resilience

From left: Monaragala District Secretary K. Nishantha, Chief Nursing Officer Upul Rathnayake, Dr. J. Susil Denagama, DPL Managing Director Pushpika Janadheera, General Manager of Logistic and Procurement Sampath Kumara at the opening event

Managing Director of DPL Pushpika Janadheera handing over the donations to Dr. J. Susil Denagama and Physiotherapist

As Dipped Products PLC (DPL) marks its 50th anniversary, the company said it is dedicated to strengthening its ongoing commitment to social development, with targeted interventions in healthcare, education, public services and rural livelihoods.

The renovation and development of the Physiotherapy Unit at the District General Hospital, Monaragala is the flagship project of the anniversary program. The project included a comprehensive refurbishment of the unit and the donation of a BTL CPMotion rehabilitation machine to support patient recovery and mobility treatment.

Strengthening access to physiotherapy services for patients across the region, this initiative represents a long-term investment in regional healthcare infrastructure, benefiting both patients and medical professionals. The upgraded facility was officially handed over recently by Dipped Products PLC Managing Director Pushpika Janadheera and senior representatives.

Alongside this project, the company has implemented a number of additional community-focused programs.

Following the impact of Cyclone Ditwah, DPL extended financial assistance to affected farmer communities in Kegalle, with a focus on families who experienced crop loss and property damage. Based on internal field assessments that considered the severity of impact and livelihood disruption, assistance was distributed among 22 affected farmers to support recovery and help restore their income sources.

In support of essential public services, DPL also donated protective gloves to the Monaragala Municipal Council. The gloves will be used by road cleaning and sanitation workers, contributing to improved safety and hygiene for personnel engaged in, daily street cleaning and waste management activities.

As part of its education outreach initiatives, employee volunteers engaged with students with visual and hearing impairments at MO/Wellassa Subahagya Vidyalaya through drawing sessions and interactive games, creating a joyful and inclusive experience for the children. A drinking water system was installed and handed over to ensure safe and reliable access to clean water. Several items requested by the school were donated to support day-to-day needs and enhance their learning environment.

These initiatives reflect DPL’s enduring commitment to social progress and national development,” said Janadheera. “As the company reflects on five decades of growth, we continue to recognise that our success is inseparable from the well-being of the communities we serve and our larger family of employees and small-scale suppliers that make up our grassroot supply chains. Marking 50 years, Dipped Products PLC reaffirms its responsibility to contribute meaningfully to Sri Lanka’s development, strengthening lives, supporting livelihoods, and creating lasting value across generations.”