25 multinationals named to Fortune World’s Best Workplaces list

Great Place To Work, the global authority on workplace culture, and Fortune Media announced the 25 winners of this year’s Fortune World’s Best Workplace list.

Organisations on this list are remarkable for delivering an exceptional employee experience despite the challenges of global scale and complexity. To be eligible for the list, organisations must have 5,000 or more global employees.

This year, organisations earned a higher rank for their ability to outperform their peers both in their local markets and globally on measures of employee trust, pride, and camaraderie. Rankings were based on over 9 million employee surveys conducted in 2024 and 2025, representing the experiences of more than 25 million employees worldwide.

The list of 25 Best Workplaces in the World was topped by Hilton in first place. DHL Express ranked second, Marriott International fifth and Allianz seventeenth on the list. .

These 4 organisations had representation from Sri Lanka that contributed to their parent MNCs global achievement of being recognised on this prestigious list.

“The powerful impact of these great organisations on our planet is a sacred trust,” says Great Place To Work CEO Michael C. Bush. “Of the more than 9 million employees surveyed, more workers at these remarkable organisations say their workplace trusts them and wants them to grow as people and professionals. These economic powerhouses also strengthen the communities where they operate, and are leaving behind a better world than the one they inherited.”

“The World’s Best Workplaces list casts an important spotlight on what employees believe are today’s exceptional workplaces, organisations where they feel trusted, empowered, and energised to do their best work,” says Fortune editor-in-chief Alyson Shontell.

Great Place To Work in Sri Lanka Director/ CEO Kshanika Ratnayake stated, “We are proud of Hilton, DHL Express, Marriott International and Allianz in Sri Lanka who are selected to this exclusive list. Their dedication to creating great workplace experiences truly exemplifies their commitment to their people, not just locally but around the globe. We are delighted to shine a spotlight on these leaders and to continue supporting organisations that invest in cultures that uplift business and performance”