CIABOC continues probe into alleged $ 2 m SriLankan Airlines aircraft deal bribe

The Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC) yesterday informed the Colombo Chief Magistrate that further investigations were underway into an alleged $ 2 million bribe linked to the purchase of a fleet of 10 aircraft for SriLankan Airlines in 2013 from a European aerospace company.

No suspects appeared before court as the principal suspect in the case, former SriLankan Airlines Chief Executive Officer Kapila Chandrasena, has passed away.

Submitting a further report, CIABOC informed court that since the suspect named in the warrant was deceased, an application would be made to recall the warrant upon receipt of the official death certificate.

Former Minister Chamal Rajapaksa’s son Sharmindra Rajapaksa and Priyanga Niyomali, the wife of former SriLankan Airlines CEO Kapila Chandrasena, have also been named as suspects in the case, with red notices issued against them.

The investigation relates to allegations that a company was established in Brunei to facilitate the receipt of a bribe amounting to approximately $ 2 million, from the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company, a European aerospace manufacturer, in connection with the aircraft transaction.

Counsel Udara Muhandiram appeared before court claiming to represent the interests of W.D. Nimal Perera, an Australian resident who is said to be the holder of the bank account into which the alleged bribe funds were remitted.

Responding to the submissions, the Chief Magistrate observed that the prosecution had not yet informed court whether Nimal Perera had been identified as a suspect in the investigation.

Counsel Harshana Matharaarachchi, appearing for suspect Priyanga Niyomali, informed court that his client was residing overseas and requested court to further consider the issuance of the red notice.

After considering submissions from both parties, the Chief Magistrate directed CIABOC to report the progress of the investigations to court on 13 October.