France becomes first EU country to ban social media access for under-15s

The Guardian - France’s parliament has approved a bill banning social media access for children under 15, making it the first EU country to bar children from apps such as TikTok.

The president, Emmanuel Macron, has championed the ban as a key reform of his final term in office and pledged to enforce it by September.

“France is leading the way in Europe when it comes to protecting our children and teenagers,” Macron said in a video posted on social media, hailing “a major step forward”.

He thanked members of parliament for backing the legislation on Tuesday.

“The Constitutional Council must now rule on it, and then it will be time to take action to make this measure a reality and protect our children online,” he added on X.

After approval by the Senate earlier on Tuesday, members of the National Assembly passed the bill by 279 votes to 81.

A growing number of countries are taking steps to restrict social media access amid multiplying warnings over its harmful effects on children.

The ban was to be introduced in two stages, with under-15s blocked from creating new accounts from 1 September. The ban would apply to existing accounts from January 2027, according to the legislation.

The digital minister, Anne Le Hénanff, said before the vote that the timeline was realistic, “because age-verification tools already exist” and others are still in the works, and the onus was on the platforms to impose the rule.

“For four months, all of us in France will have to prove our age,” she told journalists. “If someone is under 15, the account will be closed.”

The minister also gave assurances that users’ personal data would be protected.

Enforcing the measure by September would ensure that one provision of the bill – a ban on mobile phones in high schools – takes effect at the beginning of the French school year.

France’s public health watchdog last year said platforms such as TikTok, Snapchat and Instagram were harmful to adolescents, particularly girls, though this was not the sole reason for their declining mental health.

Lawmakers agreed on the need for regulation but the two chambers had disagreed on the approach.

French senators had opted for a two-tier system distinguishing between blacklisted platforms flagged as harmful to a child’s development, and those that could still be accessed with parental consent.

But the lower house’s blanket ban prevailed, despite criticism from some on the left over the age verification process, the speed of its implementation and risks of circumvention as well as privacy concerns.

Exceptions to the ban are provided for sites such as online encyclopedias and educational platforms, and the text does not provide for any penalties for children or parents.

“The major platforms are, in my view, largely ready,” assembly member Laure Miller told AFP.

The blacklisting system would have taken more time, including fresh consultations with the European Commission on the criteria, and carried a “small risk” of non-compliance with European law, said centrist senator Catherine Morin-Desailly.

The European Commission has been considering a social media ban after a push by member states, including France, Greece and Spain, for limiting access.

Last week, Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the commission, said children should have “phased and gradual access” to social media.

The European Commission has also unveiled an age verification app that EU member states, including France, have begun testing in recent months.

After Macron’s government suspended pensions reforms last year, a social media ban could be his last major domestic change before he steps down next year.

France will be closely watched by other European states – it is one of 20 countries worldwide to have proposed or introduced such measures.

Last December, Australia became the first country in the world to require TikTok, YouTube, Snapchat and other top sites to remove accounts held by under-16s or face heavy fines.

Why Countries Are Banning Children from Social Media and What It Means for Sri Lanka