Thank You For Your Attention To This Matter

New modes of conducting global politics are upon us: X-messaging and Lego rapper videos. Unthinkable before, but we all pay attention as requested to the first, and by compulsive viewing of the second.

The first made fashionable by the President of the United States with the signature line, “Thank you for your attention to this matter” can inform us real time (and has) whether large numbers of people on the other side of the world live or die, with the mighty US military machine ready for kinetic action, is being countered by the second, with Lego videos dropping thick and fast by an independent Iranian group of students called Explosive Media in classic asymmetrical warfare, winning the battle of narratives on social media, gaining millions of views.

The AI assisted, well-made and appealing videos using Lego characters in the visuals set to rap music, now incorporating many other styles of music, is directed at a global audience though mainly targeting an American one. The content is serious but funny, and many a truth is laid bare in jest. It is reported that the Iranian Government accounts have shared them as well, which is a testament to discerning Iranian public diplomacy. When multiple mainstream TV stations bring in experts on prime time news to analyze the phenomenon, it has clearly done its job.

Cool, savvy, well-educated and politically very sophisticated Iranian youth are crashing the world stage, effectively re-interpreting western narratives of history, current affairs, truth and “fake news”, and notions of right and wrong. And the world can’t get enough of it, made clear by the numerous comments and shares.

In these testing times in global politics, they are a welcome addition in the effort to understand the very real and on-going threat of an unintended catastrophe affecting all of us, involved and uninvolved alike.

In what seemed to be intractable crisis heading towards a seismic event in international affairs, an unexpected mediator stepped up and offered to manage it. Pakistan emerged as a courageous and competent peace-maker, taking the initiative in a dangerously escalating clash of civilizations, to credibly offer diplomacy as solution, having cultivated good relations with both the US and the countries of West Asia, including Iran.

Pakistani diplomats are some of the best in the world. They are well trained and disciplined. They have excellent language skills, able to speak to the West with diplomatic sophistication as well as cultural affinity with the East.

They are courageous in speaking out at multilateral forums, always with admirable knowledge of the rules of procedure. They are often elected as spokesperson for the OIC, the Organization of Islamic Countries at the United Nations. Their diplomatic training centers and think-tanks are exemplary.

I can testify to their courageous competence, having seen them work during my husband’s diplomatic assignments at UN forums and made close friendships with some while a student at the Institute of Modern Languages during my father’s stint as chargé d’affaires in Islamabad.

Much of the world was unaware of the quality of Pakistan’s diplomats, until they unexpectedly stepped up leveraging these advantages to bring the world back from the brink. We can hardly forget the recent scary face-off between the US and Iran when the latter’s civilization was within inches of being eliminated by X, formerly known as Twitter. Phew! Pakistan, thank you for your invaluable attention to that matter.

Other stars emerged from Iran, primarily their Foreign Minister, now a social media sensation. Just as with Pakistan, the world was unaware of the well-educated sophistication of the Iranian elite. Most of their officials had PhDs, as the world soon found out when they trooped into Islamabad for the Pakistani-mediated negotiations, well prepared and confident. Despite the obvious financial and military advantages of the country they were facing, on this battleground, there was no mismatch. Quite the contrary. Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi’s book on Negotiations has made the New York Times bestseller list.

The Open Letter to the American People penned by the President Masoud Pezeshkian of Iran was a masterclass in calm, reasoned, and convincingly knowledgeable appeal to the ordinary people in the country of the adversary, while their own leaders engaged in threats and theatrics liberally laced with expletives. Americans are paying attention, reading out the entire contents of that letter on social media in admiration.

Despite it being reported that the US delegation grew in respect for the Iranian negotiators, even after 21 hours, the reality of the abiding issue in the Middle-East, that of Israel’s threat perception, had its predictable impact. They concluded without agreement.

The talks may have failed temporarily, but Pakistani diplomacy didn’t. Face to face talks between the two sides was a singular diplomatic achievement. The two sides sized up each other and came to their own conclusions. So did the rest of the world, paying close attention to a matter that would affect their daily lives significantly.

The need for traditional diplomacy has never been more urgent as at this moment. Something new is being revealed by the very effort. There is a changing, undeniable dynamic in global affairs. The initiatives for maintaining and even restoring stability are coming from the global South and East. China is credibly profiling itself as an alternative global partner offering stability.

The world order is in flux and has not yet settled into a steady pattern. As the two belligerents argue as to whose blockade of the Strait of Hormuz is more deadly for the world, those suffering the ill-effects are making deals in Yuan. Experts analyzing who the winner is in this war conclude it’s neither of the belligerents, but 3rd countries such as China, which they say will gain economically.

The current state of play cannot stand where decades of restraint in the conduct of international relations with even nominal reference to the UN Charter is replaced with the early human version of who’s got the bigger club.

Incredible as it may have seemed a few years ago, recent negotiating positions resemble a hold-up on a dark street: “Agree, or you will be bombed back to the Stone Age.” The Stone Age is exactly where such a strategy would have been considered cutting edge, but this is the 21st century after two world wars.

As history would have it, Pope Leo, the first American Pope and therefore speaking in English, got everyone’s attention when he reminded the world of the message of Jesus, blessed be the peacemakers, condemned the unrelenting violence being visited on the people of the Middle-East and called for dialogue as a way of settling issues. The world applauded.

In revelatory reaction, this drew angry responses from the global hegemon, hoping to make power the sole variable in international affairs. The US Vice-President, a Catholic, told the Pope to stick to moral issues, as if war and peace were outside the realm of morality. And yet, history has proved that Jesus’ message of peace and righteousness and the blood of the Martyrs peacefully preaching that message, ultimately upended the Roman Empire, the world’s greatest in that era.

The Pope on the other hand told an audience that he carries a photo of a little Muslim boy who held up a placard welcoming the Pope to Lebanon, who subsequently died in the recent Israeli bombings. He urged people to work together to bring peace and friendship and continued to condemn war.

The shaping of a new order is inevitable. The Middle-East is where the old one is unravelling. The perennial issue left unresolved in the world, that which most dare not name, is that of Israel and Palestine. The UN, where this issue is taken up in multiple forums, both in Geneva and New York has failed to make any significant dent as Palestinian deaths have continued to mount.

The world watches in horror as the greater Israel project plays out in Lebanon. Unfortunately, the United States’ attention to that matter resulted in a copycat project to annex Canada and Greenland. The now familiar opening position for negotiations of “Or else we will take it by force” was on display when it was first mooted.

As the UN prepares to elect its next Secretary General soon, any delusions of what the UN can do to prevent violent conflict have disappeared. However, it is indispensable in dealing with the human suffering afterwards. Their work in the grey ruins of recently bombed out cities, overflowing hospitals, schools and community centers is the one ray of hope in these bewildering times. The resilience of the staff, their unwavering commitment to help the victims and professional reports from the field are all humanity can depend on in the absence of any resolution to the crisis itself.

The UN is not primarily its bureaucrats and staff. It’s made up of member states. Their permanent representatives meet often to discuss numerous issues, to resolve issues, to set standards, to enforce compliance and to consider detailed reports on many matters.

They should step up, and pay more attention to the dangerous direction in which interactions between states are heading, with the sovereign equality of states, sparing of innocents in armed conflicts, proportionality etc. are being bombed into irrelevance as we speak.

No country is being spared the consequences of the wars in this globalized world. We have very little room to maneuver economically, being hamstrung by the arrangements with the ISB holders and the IMF.

Are they paying attention? Having abandoned the opportunity to gain us the necessary flexibility to repay our loans by re-negotiated IMF and ISB repayment packages, this government seems to have taken its eye off the ball altogether.

They have not paid attention to the banking system, a dangerous state of affairs that can escalate if people lose confidence in this government’s ability to ensure compliance and control of their financial affairs.

Days after a private bank was found to have had a massive fraud committed by their staff, a government repayment of a loan to the tune of 2.5 million US dollars went untraceably missing! Who exactly was not paying attention to this matter?

With the world in flux and countries making new arrangements, can we rely on our own government to be proactive and make the necessary arrangements to ease the inevitable increase in the financial burden? Current events don’t inspire confidence. Are the leading ministries working round the clock to detail our options? Are they being hacked and are they safe from emails?

It is hoped that those in charge are paying some attention to these matters.

FAO Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific aims at “resilience from within”: Sri Lanka’s Active Engagement Reaffirmed

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.