Bali, get ready …for Alston Koch

Singer Alston Koch, of ‘Disco Lady’ fame, has been much in the news these past few weeks.

Also known as “Asia’s King of Pop,” Alston is set to perform at the 8th WCH Royal Summit, in Bali, Indonesia.

A news release, from the organisers of this prestigious event, highlighted the following:

“We are absolutely thrilled to announce that the one and only Alston Koch, Asia’s King of Pop and Commonwealth Union Envoy to Australia and the Pacific Region, will join us as a VIP Guest and Celebrity Performer at the 8th WCH Royal Summit!

“Get ready, Bali! Alston will be gracing our event this November 12-13, 2025. His incredible talent and superstar presence will bring an unparalleled level of excitement to our global gathering. We can’t wait to see him perform!”

According to reports coming my way, Alston will deliver a special musical performance at the Summit, which is dedicated to promoting peace, sustainability, and cultural diplomacy.

What’s more, Alston, I’m told, will receive knighthood recognition during the WCH Royal Awards Gala Night for his outstanding contributions to music and humanity.

The Sri Lankan-born artiste, who now resides in Australia, is a passionate advocate for climate action and environmental awareness, aligning with the Summit’s theme of transforming compassion into global action.

Alston has performed worldwide and achieved success in countries like Australia, Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, India, and Sri Lanka, and he has received numerous international awards for his influence in music and philanthropy, including ARIA awards and a platinum award.

Surprisingly, we have not seen Alston doing his own thing, in our part of the world, for quite a while.

The last time I saw him in action, at a concert, was decades ago … at the BMICH!

I’m sure music lovers here would love to experience an Alston Koch concert in Colombo.

In October 2025, Alston Koch was appointed Envoy to Australia and the Pacific Region by the Commonwealth Union, representing the organisation in promoting regional collaboration, inclusivity, and sustainability.

The 8th WCH Royal Summit will take place at the UC Silver & Gold in Bali, featuring an elite assembly of global influencers dedicated to advancing peace, humanitarian development, and sustainable impact.

Contributions of the Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka and its Future Role

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.