CDS rings market opening bell to mark 35 years

From left: CDS Manager Depository Services, CDS R&D Strategy and Projects Vindhya Colombage, CSE COO Chandrakanth Jayasinghe, CDS Head Nadeera Athukorale, CDS and CSE Director Kosala Gamage, CDS and CSE Director Jayantha Fernando, CDS and CSE Director Arjuna Herath, CSE CEO Rajeeva Bandaranaike, CDS Chairman and CSE Director Ray Abeywardena, CSE Chairman Dimuthu Abeyesekera, CSE Director Senaka Kakiriwaragodage, CDS Manager Central Control and Compliance Ruchira Jayasinghe and CSE Clear Director Ruwan Manathunga

Central Depository Systems (Pvt.) Ltd (CDS), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE), commemorated its 35th anniversary by ringing the market opening bell at the CSE last week, marking three and a half decades of supporting the growth and development of Sri Lanka’s capital market infrastructure.

The ceremony brought together the members of the CDS and CSE boards and former leaders of the institution to celebrate CDS’ journey since its establishment in 1991 as South Asia’s first Central Securities Depository and the seventh of its kind globally.

Delivering the welcome remarks, CDS Head Nadeera Athukorale remarked, “For 35 years, the story of CDS has been one of continuous commitment, continuous improvement and continuous dedication – powering trust, enabling progress and shaping the future. Generations of employees have carried that torch forward.”

CSE Chief Market Operations Officer Chandrakanth Jayasinghe stated, “Thirty-five years of achievement have positioned CDS as a cornerstone of market infrastructure, enabling seamless post-trade operations and supporting long-term market development.”

In his keynote address, CDS Chairman Ray Abeywardena stated, “CDS is considered the backbone of the CSE and provides an invaluable service. It is far more than a mere technology platform; it is an institution of trust and integrity. It safeguards the integrity of ownership and commands the highest levels of trust and confidence of all stakeholders. It also ensures efficiency, strong governance, transparency, accountability and resilience throughout its 35 years of unwavering service.”

CSE CEO and former CDS Head Rajeeva Bandaranaike said, “We envision a CDS that serves as Sri Lanka’s National Depository, offers trusted escrow solutions, safeguards digital credentials through EduVault, powers an interconnected financial ecosystem and embraces fintech innovation.”

A special address was delivered by first CSE General Manager Ravi Peiris, who reflected on the formative years of both the CSE and CDS.

He recalled how the CSE emerged following economic liberalisation, while CDS was established to meet the demands of a rapidly evolving share market and growing investor participation.

Peiris noted that CDS marked a significant step into the digital age and as the first depository of its kind in South Asia and the seventh globally, was a pioneering initiative. Despite numerous challenges, the project was successfully realised with the support of USAID and the industry leadership.

As part of the anniversary celebrations, CDS unveiled several new digital service offerings aimed at further enhancing convenience, accessibility and engagement for the stakeholders. These included the launch of the CDS WhatsApp chatbot, designed to provide the users with quick and convenient access to information and support services, newly launched CDS e-Connect Web Portal, offering an enhanced digital experience for CDS account holders and CDS Corporate Solutions Virtual AGM e-Voting Solution, a new platform designed to support digital shareholder participation and corporate governance through virtual Annual General Meetings and electronic voting capabilities.

A special segment of the event was dedicated to recognising the individuals who have played a pivotal role in shaping CDS over the past three and a half decades. Commemorative plaques were presented to former CDS Heads Renuke Wijayawardhane, Charitha Dumbukola, Rajeeva Bandaranaike and Nalin Fonseka.