Banking veteran joins Seylan Developments Board

Seylan Developments PLC, a property development, administration and maintenance firm part of the Seylan Bank group, has appointed Ranil Dissanayake to its Board as a Non-Executive Director.

Dissanayake is the Chief Operating Officer of Seylan Bank PLC, and Associate Member of the Institute of Bankers.

Dissanayake joined Seylan Bank PLC in 1989 and rose to Assistant Manager Grade where he took over duties as Branch Manager Borella Branch (1995–1999). Thereafter, he was promoted to Manager Grade in 1999 and assigned as Branch Manager to several Metropolitan branches including Kollupitiya, and flagship Millennium Branch by 2004 after being promoted to the grade of Senior Manager.

Thereafter, he served as a Senior Relationship Manager in Corporate Credit and assigned duties as Regional Manager to Suburbs II Region and subsequently Metropolitan Region, having been promoted to Chief Manager Grade in 2012.

In 2018, he became Assistant General Manager, initially performing duties as Zonal Head and thereafter Head of SME, where he partnered Boston Consulting Group (BCG) to reform SME lending and enhance credit review processes. He was promoted to Deputy General Manager – Branch Credit (2022–2025), directing SME lending strategy and overseeing key business units including Islamic Banking, Credit Monitoring, Margin Trading, Factoring, and Regional Credit Hubs.

In October 2025, he was appointed Chief Operating Officer, taking responsibility for branch network performance, branch operations, branch credit, corporate credit branches, legal, and Islamic banking functions, reporting directly to the Chief Executive Officer.

His career reflects strong leadership, strategic execution, and a proven ability to drive operational excellence and sustainable growth.

As Chief Operating Officer, he contributes to the strategic and operational management of Seylan Bank’s branch network, aligning operations with corporate objectives. His career reflects a strong dedication to financial inclusion, SME growth, operational excellence, and sustainable banking practices, uniquely qualifying him to drive innovation and long-term growth.He has over 35 years of experience in Branch Banking, Corporate Banking, and SME Finance.