My first Aluth Avurudda in my brother-in-law’s home

Listen to those bird calls. From among the usual sounds, a familiar but rare one seems to emerge now-a-days with increasing regularity – the call of the KOHA (Asian Koel) – bringing excitement and enthusing a weary nation.

This call signifies the arrival of the Sinhala and Tamil New Year – the historic National celebration of the Sri Lankans. Sleepy hamlets come alive as plans commence for the preparation of traditional sweetmeats for this event. “Avurudu Games” and competitions – both traditional and other – are revived, organized by villagers, groups and various associations.

New clothes are a must and sewing machines whirr. However, the most joyful event is the “annual family get-together” when family members dispersed over various parts of the country and the world come home to observe the rituals together at the given auspicious times.

In lighter vein, even the gambling followed by the drunken brawl come to have been accepted during Avurudu celebrations!!

When I was just 12-years old we spent the New Year season in my brother-in-law’s home in which he and my elder sister lived, plus the in-law family of parents and six siblings. Those girls and boys matched our family very well – two elder girls, two younger boys and two younger girls.

That was the first time I enjoyed a traditional village Avurudu celebration. One incident that is etched in my memory is how Ran Banda who wanted to show off his good looks climbed a jambu tree and started plucking the fruits for the girls. Then came a BRRRR sound and with the broken branch down came Ran Banda. He felt so awkward that he disappeared from the scene. Not truthfully, but politely everybody applauded.

Also for the first time, I saw the giant wheel built by the villagers for the celebration and daredevils whizzing past on it. Obviously we young girls were deprived of this pleasure. Of course food was indescribable, with kavum, unduwel, mung kavum, narang kavum etc., all hidden in the woven kurunu petti . We knew how to find them and we ate copiously- and that made us sick.

Auspicious times were observed to the letter. One such important custom was people having their heads anointed with a medicinal decoction, whilst standing on some special leaves under a branch of a particular tree. The person applying the oil was a respected elder, often the chief monk of the village temple.

Blessings here are reciprocal and very comforting as one is blessed with good health, good fortune and long life. One sure fact is that at this season people wish each other the best of everything in the year to come.

Chamara Kala Nikethanaya Marks Golden Milestone with Grand ‘Sheershabharana Ordination’ Ceremony

Forever Hero Herath: Remembering a JVP Sahodaraya on the 55th Anniversary

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.