High-level event on Management of Public Finance

The Pathfinder Foundation conducted a high-level event, focusing on the theme “Managing Public Finance: The South Asian Experience”. The event, held in a hybrid format, brought together university scholars, representatives from leading think tanks, and experts in related fields.

Bernard Goonetilleke, Chairman of the Pathfinder Foundation, in his opening remarks stressed the importance of sound fiscal governance in the wake of the socio-political crises experienced in Sri Lanka, Nepal and Bangladesh in recent years – which indicate that South Asia can no longer treat fiscal policy as secondary or routine. His remarks concluded on the note that the discussion was of vital importance in the wake of the catastrophic cyclone that ravaged Sri Lanka the previous week.

Anoop Singh, former Director of the Asia and Pacific Department of the International Monetary Fund, delivered the keynote address, emphasising that the global economy is heading into a new era characterised by significant changes in the international trading environment, where the role of public finance and its management as catalysts for economic growth has been highlighted. This shift, however, could not be timelier, given the historic highs global debt has reached. “What you cannot see, you cannot manage” – Singh stated that one of the main drivers of increasing global debt is “data gaps” caused by inconsistently defined, misclassified, and unreported debt and expenditure, among other issues. Additionally, Mr Singh asserted that these data gaps are deliberate and that a framework for global financial reporting of this calibre must be established by developing systems that monitor and audit, supported by institutions that uphold these systems.

Sri Lanka’s Food Security after Cyclone Ditwah: Risk, Recovery, and Resilience

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.