ABBA scene in Doha … Ishini in the spotlight

The group ABBA, from Sweden, officially disbanded in 1982, and that made room for several ABBA imitators to come into the scene.

What’s more, ABBA tribute concerts are also turning out to be popular with music lovers who still appreciate, and enjoy, the music of ABBA.

With this in mind, Treffen House Hotel, in Doha, decided to put together a series of ABBA Tribute Concerts which were held, in the hotel itself, on 27th, 28th and 29th November, 2025.

To do the needful, on stage, they selected our very own Ishini Fonseka and her participation certainly did highlight the global appeal of ABBA’s music and the talent of Sri Lankan artistes.

The tribute shows brought the magic of ABBA’s hits to the audience,

Backed by a Sri Lankan band, the Vibes, based in Qatar, Ishini was in the spotlight for one hour, each night, belting out the hits of ABBA.

She also obliged the audience, from various nationalities, with a few hit songs in Hindi, Tamil and Sinhala.

Her repertoire included the best of ABBA hits, such as ‘Mamma Mia’, ‘Dancing Queen’, ‘Chiquitita’ and many more.

Being a multi-instrumentalist, she also played the piano, and guitar, as well, while singing some of the beautiful ABBA songs.

The three-day concert was a part of a Sri Lankan food festival, held at the hotel, in which several unique Sri Lankan cuisines were promoted internationally.

The event’s main sponsor was Prime Lands, and the event focused on the importance of investing on Real Estate, especially since the foreign currency sent to Sri Lanka benefits the country’s economy vastly.

Kumudu Fonseka, the General Manager of Treffen House Hotel, the main man behind the spectacular three-day Sri Lankan Food Festival, I’m told, is very keen to highlight the uniqueness of Sri Lanka.

He also has plans to put together a charity concert to raise funds for the people in Sri Lanka, affected by Cyclone Ditwah.

The Chief Guest, on the second day, was the Ambassador of Sri Lanka, who personally appreciated and admired Ishini Fonseka for bringing back her childhood memories of ABBA.

Ishini was involved in three other events, at the hotel, as a guest star, before returning home.

Her next foreign assignment is to the Maldives, on 22nd December, with her band Ishini & The Branch.

She will be doing the Christmas and New Year’s Eve scene in the Maldives and will be back, in Sri Lanka, on 02nd January 2026.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.