Indiya at City of Dreams offers landmark dining experience

Welcomes Indian Accent Mumbai and Ekaa for an exclusive celebration of contemporary Indian cuisine

This August, Indiya at City of Dreams Sri Lanka is bringing together two of India’s most celebrated culinary destinations, Indian Accent Mumbai and Ekaa, for an exclusive two-night dining experience on August 7-8, 2026.

The guest chef experience will see Indian Accent Mumbai Executive Chef Chef Rijul Gulati and Ekaa Head Chef and Partner Chef Niyati Rao, present specially curated vegetarian and non-vegetarian Chef’s Tasting Menus that celebrate India’s rich culinary heritage through bold innovation, exceptional ingredients and refined technique.

Designed as a seamless dialogue between two distinct culinary philosophies, the menus bring together Indian Accent’s globally acclaimed reinterpretation of Indian classics with Ekaa’s ingredient-led, deeply thoughtful approach inspired by seasons, cultures and memories.

Guests can look forward to an extraordinary progression of dishes including Papdi Chaat with Crackling Spinach, Blue Cheese Naan, Black Cod with Masala Carrot and Apricot Chutney, Tomato Tomato, Marathawada and the iconic Daulat Ki Chaat, before concluding with the elegant Risalamande featuring pandan rice gelato.

“Indian cuisine is shaped by stories, traditions and ingredients from across the country,” said Chef Gulati.

“We’re excited to bring Indian Accent’s perspective to Colombo and share our approach to modern Indian cuisine with guests at Indiya.”

Chef Rao added, “Ekaa has always been about celebrating ingredients, cultures and memories in a way that feels both personal and unexpected. We’re excited to bring our culinary philosophy to Colombo and create an experience that encourages guests to discover Indian cuisine through a new lens.”

Indian Accent is renowned as the pioneering modern Indian restaurant worldwide, with its inventive approach seamlessly blending traditional flavours with contemporary techniques. Located in New Delhi, New York and Mumbai, Indian Accent has won more accolades than it can count over the years. It has also been recognised by Time Magazine as one of the World’s 100 Greatest Places.

Joining the experience is Ekaa, one of Mumbai’s most exciting contemporary restaurants, led by acclaimed Chef Rao. Inspired by ingredients rather than convention, Ekaa has earned widespread recognition for its imaginative, ingredient-first philosophy, while Chef Rao herself has been honoured on both the Forbes India and Forbes Asia 30 Under 30 lists, alongside consecutive recognitions at The Best Chef Awards.

For just two evenings, Indiya at City of Dreams Sri Lanka will offer guests a rare opportunity to experience two of India’s most celebrated restaurants through an unforgettable tasting journey where tradition meets innovation, reaffirming its position as one of Colombo’s premier destinations for exceptional Indian dining.

As the Indian specialty restaurant at City of Dreams Sri Lanka, Indiya continues to champion the richness and evolution of Indian cuisine by introducing internationally acclaimed chefs and celebrated dining concepts to Colombo, creating exceptional experiences that place the city firmly on the regional culinary map.