SLBC to celebrate 35th anniversary with launch of inaugural SLBC EXPO Pavilion 2025

Official opening today, 21 November at 2 p.m. at Pullman Dubai Creek City Centre

The Sri Lanka Business Council UAE (SLBC), under the Dubai Chamber of Commerce will begin its 35th Anniversary celebrations in 2026 with the launch of the inaugural SLBC EXPO Pavilion 2025, scheduled to be officially inaugurated today, 21 November at 2 p.m. at Pullman Dubai Creek City Centre.

The Chief Guest will be Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the UAE Prof. Arusha Cooray and Guests of Honour are SLBC Eminent Senior Adviser, Founder Member and Past Chairman Farook Kassim and Eminent Senior Adviser and Past Board Member Gamini Kannangara.

Senior diplomats, corporate leaders, business councils, and members of the Sri Lankan community in the UAE will also be present.

The SLBC EXPO Pavilion 2025 will present a carefully curated selection of Sri Lankan excellence, featuring leading brands across diverse sectors. The participating brands are: Dilmah – premium Ceylon tea; China Harbour, Colombo Port City – real estate and investment hub; Prime Land – signature real estate developments; DFCC Bank – financial services and expatriate investment solutions; Deo Global Lanka – pure Ceylon cinnamon and spices; Sargia Holidays – bespoke travel and tourism experiences; Serendip Oud – authentic Ceylon oud; New Education Group – higher education and skill development; and Impact IT – technology and digital solutions.

The event is supported by Siraj Finance, Magic Mango, XESS Advertising, Pullman Creekside Deira City Centre (Official Hospitality Partner), Sri Lanka Bankers Association UAE and CASL UAE Chapter.

This powerful combination of exhibitors and supporters reflects the depth and diversity of Sri Lankan talent and enterprise.

SLBA UAE Chairman Suren Swaminathan said: “The SLBC EXPO Pavilion 2025 is a carefully planned and curated event designed to present Sri Lanka’s hidden gems to the world. From premium products like tea, cinnamon and oud, to real estate, tourism, education, innovation and financial services, we are showcasing brands that reflect the true potential and excellence of our nation. As we enter our 35th anniversary year in 2026, this Pavilion marks the beginning of a new era for the SLBC.”

“We extend our appreciation to Pullman Creekside Deira City Centre for their exceptional partnership, and complimenting ‘Chronicles of Ceylon’ culinary festival, which beautifully brings together culinary and trade, hospitality and culture together,” he added.

The Pavilion serves as the first major milestone in the SLBC’s 35th anniversary calendar. It aims to: promote Sri Lanka’s finest industries, create cross-border trade and investment opportunities, strengthen Sri Lanka–UAE business relations, and provide a platform for Sri Lankan brands to explore Middle East market entry.

Exhibition hours are 21 November: 2 p.m.– 10 p.m., 22 November: 10 a.m. – 10 p.m. and 23 November: 10 a.m. – 4 p.m.