Laugfs Holdings appoints Dhanusha Muthukumarana as Group MD and Group CEO

Laugfs Holdings Limited has appointed Dhanusha Muthukumarana as Group Managing Director and Group Chief Executive Officer, effective October 1, 2026.

Muthukumarana brings a strong background in engineering, technology, professional leadership and entrepreneurship.

The appointment reflects the group’s focus on strengthening leadership, accelerating business transformation and driving sustainable growth across its diversified portfolio.

Muthukumarana is an award-winning professional, with more than 26 years of experience across banking and finance, consumer goods, manufacturing, healthcare, logistics, enterprise software and technology consulting and diversified businesses.

He has held senior leadership roles in Sri Lankan and international organisations, including Fortune 500 companies, building expertise in business transformation, enterprise architecture, strategic planning and innovation.

Throughout his career, he has led complex transformation initiatives, improved business operations and aligned technology and operations with corporate strategy. He brings this combination of strategic, commercial and technology leadership to Laugfs as the group pursues operational excellence, long-term value creation and value capture.

Muthukumarana is an executive alumnus of the University of Oxford (Saïd Business School), United Kingdom, where he successfully completed his education in strategic innovation and ranked among the top performers in his cohort.

He holds a Master of Business Administration from the Postgraduate Institute of Management, University of Sri Jayewardenepura and possesses postgraduate qualifications in information technology. He is currently pursuing postgraduate studies in economics.

He is a member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, USA, Institute of Engineering and Technology, United Kingdom and British Computer Society.

He was also the first Sri Lankan inducted into the Forbes Technology Council.