Reporting on mechanized gemming of the Kaluganga and Anura B’s invitation

During this period, I was suddenly appointed by the President as Chairman of a Committee appointed by him to examine and report on a proposed project put forward by a foreign consortium for mechanized gem mining in one of our most important rivers, the Kalu Ganga. A public controversy was building up about this proposal and the President and the government decided that they needed advice.

The other members of the committee were Dr. D. Nesiah, Secretary, to the Ministry of Environment and Parliamentary Affairs; Mr. C.G. Wickremasinghe, Additional Secretary to the President; Mr. D.G. Premachandra, Secretary to the Ministry of Forestry, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development: Mr. O.C. Jayewardene, Secretary to the Ministry of Lands; Mr. G.K. Amaratunge, Chairman Central Environmental Authority; Mr. W.M.P. Weerasinghe, Chairman State Gem Corporation; and Mr. A de Vaas Gunawardena, Director-General, Board of Investment.

(b) Whether the adverse environmental impacts resulting from mechanized gemming in rivers, streams, etc., in Sri Lanka would outweigh the benefits that would accrue from such activity;

(c) If so, whether such mechanized gem mining in river and stream beds should be banned island-wide; and

(d) Whether allowing a pilot project in the Kalu Ganga to determine the environmental impacts would serve any purpose or would be desirable in the present socio-political context.

Mr. Y.B. Pussedeniya, my Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Public Administration was appointed Secretary to the Committee.

A Presidential Committee imposes great responsibilities on the Chairman and members. It imposes a special obligation to go into matters thoroughly, so that no public criticism would emanate from the report itself. There was also every prospect that the government would act on the recommendations in the report. We therefore, gave wide publicity through the newspapers and the broadcasting media to the committee’s terms of reference and invited written submissions. Almost 50 memoranda and letters came in from persons, associations and groups mostly opposing the project.

The committee summoned the Director of Irrigation; the Land Commissioner and the Director, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau (who came with their relevant deputies) and had detailed discussions with them. We gave a hearing to the sponsors of the project. We looked at reports from geologists, hydrologists, ecologists, aquatic biologists, sociologists and environmental engineers. In the course of these deliberations, we covered the areas of water quality surveys of the river; aquatic habitats and fauna of the river; opinion surveys and land use analysis of residents along the middle stretch of the river where the proposed mining was to take place; hydrological and morphological impacts of mechanized dredging of the river, and the geological aspects pertaining to mechanized dredging of the river.

At the end of several rounds of meetings, hearings and studies, the committee unanimously recommended to government that the proposal be not proceeded with. The scientific evidence was clearly against it. In a 40 page report which I dictated, cogent reasons were given as to why the committee came to such a conclusion. No one opposed our conclusions and recommendations. The government accepted our report and abandoned the proposal. No doubt the gems and precious stones would continue to lie in the river for a future generation to exploit with safer and more modern technology.

This whole episode reveals once again, the varied uses to which Secretaries and other senior officials are put to by governments. Needless to say these extra responsibilities involve a tremendous amount of work which one has to find time for whilst carrying on one’s normal work. For this reason, most of the meetings connected with the work of this Presidential Committee were scheduled to commence at 5.30 or 6 p.m. Most days we finished well past 8.30 p.m.

It was now December, and 1993 was drawing to a close, when unexpectedly, I received a call from Mr. Anura Bandaranaike. In his own affable manner he asked me whether I could drop in at his home and meet him for a few minutes. He understood the sensitivities of a public servant enough to also say, “There should not be a problem of your dropping in at home, since I am now a government MP.” Sometime earlier, due to internal party problems Mr. Bandaranaike had left the Sri Lanka Freedom Party, which his father had founded, and joined the United National party, of which his father had been a senior Minister before he left it to form his own party.

We met on the morning of December 13. After greeting me cordially and after an exchange of pleasantries, and some recollections on my part of some of his doings as a very young man, which amused him greatly, he got to the point. He said “Dharmasiri, President Wijetunge has called me and offered the portfolio of Higher Education. I told him, I have been 16 years in Parliament and had also been Leader of the Opposition, at a most difficult time, but I have no ministerial experience. I therefore told him that I need a very experienced Secretary to guide me, and inquired whether I could choose my own Secretary. Mr. Wijetunge agreed and I asked for you. I am very sorry. I must apologize to you for not asking you before I made this request to the President.”

“What did the President say?” I asked. “He said that he does not want to talk to you about this, but if I spoke to you and you agreed, he would have no objection.”

I was impressed both by Mr. Bandaranaike’s affability which I already knew was part of his character, as well as his humility in telling the President of his lack of ministerial experience and asking for an experienced Secretary. This too was typical of him. I however had a problem. It would indeed be a pleasure to work with someone whom I had first come to know as a child running around the lawns of Temple Trees in a pair of shorts and with a cricket bat in his hands, and deciding whenever he got out that it was a no ball!

The problem was that I had hardly been six months in a difficult Ministry, which I had now stabilized and where there was so much to be done. Many changes and reforms were badly needed in the administrative structure, the way of conducting public business, acquiring, storing and using information and some of the other things that I have already referred to. This was going to be an enormous and challenging task, and I had just begun, in spite of other distractions such as reporting on “mechanized gemming in the Kalu Ganga,” to start a series of discussions with my senior colleagues in the Public Service about this whole issue of reforms and the areas, the modalities, the mechanisms, the sequencing and the pacing of such reforms.

I mentioned some of this. But Mr. Bandaranaike was not to be denied. He reiterated his earnest desire to have me as his Secretary, and when I smilingly kept on looking at him without comment, he went on to say “I will be honoured if you will be my Secretary,” and then followed up with the words, “I have already mentioned this to Amma, and she’s delighted.” I burst out laughing and said “you are a very clever young man. You have now bound me hand and foot.” By now, I had realized that I just could not say “No”. His final words that his mother, Mrs. Bandaranaike was “delighted” was the ultimate reinforcement. I accepted.

But before I left the Ministry of Public Administration, I was gratified at some of the compliments paid to me and my officers by Members of Parliament, when the Votes of the Ministry were being discussed in the debate on the Committee Stage of the Budget on the 9th of December 1993. The most generous reference was made by the reflective and cultured Member for the Batticaloa District Mr. Prince Cassinader. Addressing the Minister, he had this to say, as reported in Hansard:

“You are composed of a very fine team of officers. You are there in the first place to skipper this key Ministry and there are men of the calibre of Mr Pieris, Mr. Lakshman Perera, Mr. Gunaratne and others who are giving you excellent support. In fact when Mr. Pieris left the Education Ministry, I was very sad, but then I realized that we cannot have a good man all the time for us alone, and what was the loss of the Education Ministry has been the gain of the Public Administration Ministry… It was refreshing to meet men in your Ministry who exude warmth, who showed spirit of service and who are hell bent to bring down the problems of the people. “

What was most gratifying was that these remarks came from a Member of Parliament of the Opposition.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, the autobiography of MDD Peiris)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.