LOLC Insurance-Seylan Bank celebrate bancassurance

LOLC Insurance recently hosted LOLC Insurance – Seylan Bancassurance Felicitation Night 2025, under the theme ‘League of Greatness’, celebrating the success of its long-standing bancassurance partnership with Seylan Bank. The event marked another milestone in a strategic collaboration that has continued to grow since 2013. The felicitation ceremony brought together the senior management, sales leadership, branch representatives and top-performing teams from both organisations to recognise excellence, appreciate contributions and reaffirm the enduring partnership between LOLC Insurance and Seylan Bank.

The collaboration currently spans 104 Seylan Bank branches across Sri Lanka, delivering accessible life and general insurance solutions islandwide. Seylan Bank Director and CEO Ramesh Jayasekara stated, “Our partnership with LOLC Insurance continues to create meaningful value for the customers while further strengthening the bancassurance proposition within the banking sector. The dedication and collaborative spirit demonstrated by both teams have been instrumental in achieving these milestones and sustaining the growth of this partnership. We look forward to enhancing our collaboration and delivering greater value to the customers in the years ahead.” Seylan Bank Deputy General Manager Retail Banking Eugene Seneviratne added, “The professionalism and operational efficiency demonstrated by the bancassurance teams have been instrumental in consolidating this partnership.

Our branch teams continue to seamlessly manage day-to-day bancassurance functions with minimal operational escalations, reflecting the strength of a well-structured and highly efficient framework. This has contributed to a smooth and mutually beneficial working relationship, enabling the partnership to enhance coordination, execution and overall performance.” LOLC General Insurance Chairman and Principal Officer and LOLC Life Assurance Director Kithsiri Gunawardena stated, “Successful partnerships are built on trust, shared values and a common vision. The strength and longevity of this collaboration reflect the commitment of both organisations to delivering meaningful impact to the customers while advancing the country’s bancassurance sector. The positive feedback and appreciation consistently received from Seylan Bank regarding the quality of service delivered and the steadfast support extended by the teams stand as a testament to the professionalism and service excellence upheld throughout the partnership.”

LOLC Life Assurance Executive Director and Principal Officer and LOLC General Insurance Director Chandana L. Aluthgama stated, “The synergy between LOLC Insurance and Seylan Bank has strengthened access to insurance solutions across the country. This long-standing collaboration reflects the type of innovation that arises from a strategic partnership anchored in a shared customer-centric approach, which has shaped a successful and sustainable bancassurance journey while supporting the long-term growth of both organisations.”