When juggernauts bear down on democracy

Sri Lanka’s legal fraternity has woken up to threats to democracy and embarked on a campaign to neutralise them. The Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) is leading the battle against the incumbent government’s efforts to undermine democracy and judicial independence. It deserves praise for its laudable mission, whose success however hinges on the cooperation of all other stakeholders.

Former BASL President Saliya Pieris, speaking at the launch of Dr. Jayampathy Wickramaratne’s book, Constitutional Conversations, in Colombo on Thursday (16), inter alia, pointed out that democracy had to be protected from the elected representatives of people as well. He must have struck a responsive chord with the discerning public when he said democracy faced graver threats under governments with steamroller majorities.

The wellbeing of democracy is inversely proportional to the concentration of unchecked political power, as evident from the experience of countries like Sri Lanka, where legal and institutional constraints are absent or inherently weak and ineffective. However, a distinction has to be made between state capacity and arbitrary, unchecked state power. Mature democracies often combine extensive democratic freedoms with highly capable states, rather than weak ones, as some political scientists have argued.

So, one may say, with apologies to Shakespeare, the fault is neither in state capacity nor in our stars, but in ourselves and the legal and institutional safeguards in place to protect democracy. President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has failed in his constitutional duty by leaving four vacancies each in the Supreme Court (SC) and the Court of Appeal (CA) unfilled for months, as legal experts have pointed out, but there is nothing that can be done to ensure that he does what the Constitution requires him to do. Who says the culture impunity came to an end with the 2024 regime change?

Mammoth parliamentary majorities not only undermine democracy but also become the undoing of the governments that command them. This has been Sri Lanka’s experience since 1970, when the SLFP-led United Front government secured a two-thirds majority (with the help of the JVP, which conducted its propaganda campaign). That administration bulldozed its way through and even extended its parliamentary term by two years. The UNP, which obtained a five-sixths majority at the 1977 general election, debilitated all legal and institutional constraints, and democracy suffered immensely under its rule as never before. Political violence and election malpractices came to be institutionalised. That regime made a general election disappear in 1982 with the help of a heavily rigged referendum. The SLFP-led UPFA government mustered a two-thirds majority after winning the 2010 general election and went to the extent of amending the Constitution to further the interests of the then Executive President by weakening the constitutional safeguards that had been introduced to ensure the independence of vital state institutions. The SLPP government, elected in 2020, abused its two-thirds majority to amend the Constitution to strengthen the executive presidency at the expense of democratic institutions. The arrogance of power made that regime impervious to public opinion and economic reality, and the economy went into a tailspin, leading to political upheavals. That supermajority turned out to be the SLPP government’s undoing as well as a curse for the country.

The JVP-led NPP, which capitalised on public anger and came to power on the back of a massive protest vote, in 2024, thinks no end of itself mainly because of its two-thirds majority. President Dissanayake has been accused of planning to amend the Constitution to increase the retirement ages of the superior court judges with an ulterior motive. He continues to ignore calls for abandoning his ill-conceived plan and filling the vacancies in the SC and the CA.

Democracy suffered extensive damage under previous governments with supermajorities, which were abused in every conceivable manner to advance the political agendas of the political leaders of the day. Now, another juggernaut is bearing down on democracy. The political Opposition is too pusillanimous to stand up to the powerful JVP-NPP government; its leaders bellow rhetoric but baulk at taking up the cudgels for democracy. Their bark is worse than their bite. Only a few individual Opposition politicians have had the courage to oppose the ongoing assault on democracy and educate the public on the excesses committed by the present-day leaders. As a result, the BASL, the independent media, and some civil society outfits have had to act as a countervailing force against the government, which is now doing exactly what it condemned previous governments for doing.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.