US$2.5Mn cyber heist; COPF covers up the top brass: UNP

Colombo, July 28 (Daily Mirror) - The United National Party (UNP) yesterday charged that the Committee on Public Finance (COPF) had failed to identify the shortcomings of senior officials in connection with the cybercrime, while highlighting that the US$2.5 million heist had occurred due to the failure of the Finance Minister and the Secretary to the Finance Ministry to monitor the transition of powers from the Central Bank to the Public Debt Management Office.

The UNP said in a statement that the COPF report discusses the hacking and the theft, but has defended the higher officials and the top brass whose shortcomings led to the theft.

"The report uses terms such as 'systematic failure' and 'procedural gaps' but has been careful not to mention anyone who could be held accountable. The easiest way to escape accountability in today's politics is to blame the system for any shortcoming rather than identify those who are responsible.

"The Treasury Secretary is responsible for public funds, while the Finance Minister must take responsibility on behalf of the political leadership of the government." The report clearly states that there were shortcomings in the internal handling of the transition, the provision of guidelines and the administration. However, no allegations have been made against any senior official. Instead, only lower-ranking officers have been blamed. Accordingly, four officials have already been interdicted for neglect of duty. The report refers only to issues relating to language and coordination. This amounts to double standards. Higher officials who designed the systems appear to have defended themselves. Negligence relating to IT systems actually invited cyber thieves to act.

"The government has attempted to portray the theft as a sophisticated cybercrime. This is not the truth.

"The External Resources Department used an outdated email service that became operational in 2016 but had been out of service since 2025. Hackers began their activities in mid-November last year. Prior warnings issued by KPMG and the Sri Lanka National Centre for Cyber Security (SLCERT) were ignored. This indicates a failure on the part of the leadership.

"There was an 18-month period to transfer debt management powers from the Central Bank to the Public Debt Management Office. The Public Debt Management Office was established in December 2024. A coordination committee was required to be set up for the transition under Section 8 of the Public Debt Management Act. This committee was responsible for implementing work assigned by the Finance Minister. However, the minister failed to appoint the relevant persons in terms of Section 7 of the Act. The Central Bank signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the Public Debt Management Office in January 2026, while the theft had already taken place between November 2025 and January 2026. Therefore, the government has concealed the truth from the public.

"The Treasury Secretary refused to appear before COPF from December 2025 to January 2026. COPF stated in its report that it had no mandate to engage in legal proceedings relating to the theft. However, the power over public finance is vested in Parliament under Article 148 of the Constitution. COPF avoided naming the Finance Minister and the Secretary to the Finance Ministry as those responsible."