The Technocity takes strong Rs. 50 m solidarity effort to rebuild hope

The Technocity Chairman and Founder Famy Ismail (right) hands over the contribution to Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya. Others from left: The Technocity Head – Digital Marketing Sanjula Hettige, CFO Jaseem Junaideen, Head – Retail Minhaj Farook, CEO Akram Badurdeen, Secretary to Prime Minister G. Pradeep Saputhanthri, The Technocity Distribution Manager Gehan Thangappan, Distribution Head – Gaming Mohamed Kadeer Ismath, and Nizran Ziyath

The Technocity Ltd., the leading authorised IT distributor in Sri Lanka for globally reputed brands such as HP, ASUS, MSI, Lenovo, BenQ, Raidmax, Kaspersky and more, has stepped forward with a remarkable Rs. 50 million relief initiative.

The Company said its goal is to assist impacted children, and schools in the most severely hit areas.

In addition to destroying buildings, landslides and floods also wrecked the digital infrastructure of many schools .Acknowledging this pressing need, The Technocity committed Rs. 50 million which includes Rs. 20 million in cash for rebuilding physical infrastructure and Rs. 30 million for supplying advanced computer devices and ICT facilities such as 50 Techno View 65” and 86” Interactive AI smart board display panels, as well as laptops, all-in-one printers, and photocopiers to affected schools in the hardest-hit regions These advanced devices will help restore classrooms, reconnect communities, and remind children that even in the face of disaster, their future remains protected and prioritised.

This initiative, developed in close collaboration with the Office of Prime Minister, and Education, Higher Education, and Vocational Education Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya. Subsequently, on 15 December, The Technocity Chairman and Founder Famy Ismail handed over the cheque to the Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya in the meeting held at the Temple Trees.

Ismail, who is also Chairman and Founder of Laptop.lk Ltd., emphasised the moral duty behind this mission. “Moments like these remind us that humanity must lead the way, especially when infrastructure damage disrupts access to education and critical IT systems that communities rely on. Our commitment is to help families rebuild their lives with dignity and strength.”