Sri Lanka Design Festival presents “Palmyra Stories from the North”

A celebration of heritage, design, and empowerment, presented by AOD and supported by the Embassy of Switzerland partnership

The Sri Lanka Design Festival (SLDF) has launched “Palmyra Stories from the North”, a special exhibition presented by the Academy of Design (AOD) with the support of the Embassy of Switzerland. The showcase opened on Thursday, 13 November and is hosted by Urban Island at its flagship store in Dharmapala Mawatha, Colombo 7, marking the first event leading into SLDF 2025 under the theme “What’s Your Colombo?”

Palmyra Stories from the North celebrates the extraordinary craftsmanship of women artisans from Northern Sri Lanka, spotlighting a collection born from AOD’s long-standing Design for Sustainable Development initiatives. Launched in 2009, these programs have empowered communities in post-conflict regions through design innovation, skill development, and access to sustainable livelihoods.

Supported by the Embassy of Switzerland, the exhibition embodies the spirit of cultural exchange and resilience. Switzerland’s continued partnership in uplifting women and vulnerable communities, reflects a shared commitment to social inclusion and sustainable development through creativity.

Curated by AOD, the collection reimagines traditional palm weaving and other northern craft traditions for contemporary design and tourism sectors. Each piece tells a story of revival, resilience, and reinvention, blending heritage techniques with modern design sensibilities to bring a new voice from the North.

AOD and Sri Lanka Design Festival Founder Linda Speldewinde said, “This exhibition is deeply symbolic. It represents the continuation of a journey that began over a decade ago when design became a tool for rebuilding lives and communities. As we begin Sri Lanka Design Festival under the theme “What’s Your Colombo?”, we’re reminded that Colombo’s story is also the story of its people, from every region, tradition, and craft.”

Ambassador of Switzerland to Sri Lanka and the Maldives Dr. Siri Walt said, “Switzerland is proud to support initiatives that champion dignity, opportunity, and cultural heritage. By partnering on Palmyra Stories from the North, we hope to amplify the talent of women artisans in the North and help safeguard these traditions for new generations, while opening pathways to sustainable livelihoods through design.”

The event serves as one of the many citywide activations across Colombo for Sri Lanka Design Festival 2025, which will unfold across the city in November 2025 uniting design, fashion, food, and creative enterprise in a celebration of Colombo’s evolving identity as South Asia’s Creative Capital.

The showcase invites interest from individuals and organisations across sectors, including NGOs, businesses and hotel partners, seeking to engage in initiatives that strengthen livelihoods in the Northern community. It aims to encourage broader participation in supporting the continued growth of the stories and skills of Northern women artisans, fostering a stronger and sustainable presence.