Tea auction sees mixed price trends as offerings fall

The overall auction offerings declined to 5.1 million kilogrammes (M/Kgs), from a 5.3 M/Kgs on offer the previous week.

The Large Leaf teas in the Low Grown and High and Mid Grown catalogues continued to sell well around last, whilst the Orthodox/Rotovane BOP/BOPFs were sluggish with many withdrawals.

The Ex-Estate offerings comprised of 0.7 M/Kgs, fairly similar to the previous week. The quality of the offerings showed no change, with limited availability of better teas.

The Best Western BOPs were irregular and easier. The corresponding BOPFs gained by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme for a select range of teas, whilst the others were firm and easier by a similar margin.

In the Below Best category, a few select BOP invoices declined by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme, whilst the others eased further. The corresponding BOPFs followed a similar trend for the teas in the higher price bracket, whilst the others sold around last.

At the lower end, the BOPs were irregular, whilst the corresponding BOPFs too were irregular and often easier. The Uda Pussellawas continued to witness very limited interest, following the lower quality.

The Uva BOPs – select coloury teas, were firm and Rs.20-40 per kilogramme dearer, whilst the others were irregular. The corresponding BOPFs – here again the coloury sorts, gained by up to Rs.50 per kilogramme and more, whilst the others declined by a similar margin.

The High and Mid Grown CTC teas – BP1s, were limited in availability and met with poor interest. The PF1s – Better all-round teas, were firm and up to Rs.50 per kilogramme dearer, whilst the others tended to fluctuate, following quality. The corresponding Low Grown varieties sold firm with select invoices appreciating by up to Rs.20 per kilogramme.

The Low Growns totalled approximately 2.2 M/Kgs, with all categories witnessing fair demand.

In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues, the BOP1s in general were firm. The OP1s were firm to dearer, whilst the well-made OPs together with the Below Best and teas at the bottom maintained.

The high-priced OPAs were firm, whilst the balance was easier. The PEKs together with the Select Best PEK1s, in general, appreciated, following quality, whilst the Best, Below Best and the clean leaf teas at the bottom maintained.

In the Tippy catalogue, a few Select Best FBOPs sold around last levels, whilst the balance together with the Best varieties were easier. The bolder types appreciated, whilst the teas at the bottom sold around last levels.

The FBOP1s, in general, were firm on last. The Select Best FF1s were firm, whilst the Best varieties were firm to easier. The Below Best and teas at the bottom were firm to selectively dearer.

In the Premium catalogue, the Tippy teas in general were dearer.