Trust, security and collaboration seen as pillars of growth in digital payments

Visa successfully hosted the Visa Sri Lanka Cybersecurity Conclave 2026 on 25 June 2026, convening leaders from the banking sector, Government, regulators and industry bodies to foster dialogue on evolving cyber threat landscape and the collective action needed to strengthen cyber resilience across Sri Lanka’s digital economy.

As digital payments continue to expand, cybersecurity remains critical to sustaining trust, protecting consumers and businesses, and supporting a more inclusive digital economy. The conclave served as a focused platform for industry dialogue on emerging cyber threats, fraud prevention, regulatory readiness and public-private collaboration in safeguarding consumers, businesses and the wider financial ecosystem.

The event featured expert-led sessions by Visa leaders, covering Cyber Threat landscape, AI-driven Cybersecurity, Visa Cyber Solutions and Advisory, Risk landscape and AI-powered Fraud Prevention introducing Featurespace. Discussions underscored the increasing sophistication of cyberattacks and fraud patterns, particularly as AI-enabled threats create new challenges for financial institutions, regulators, and businesses.

A senior-level panel discussion brought together Sirikumara Kudagama, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka; Waruna Dhanapala, Secretary to the Ministry of Digital Economy; Brigadier K.V.P. Dhammika, Director of Cyber Command and Information Warfare Centre; Mr. Kapila Hettihamu, Chief Risk Officer of Commercial Bank of Ceylon; and Avanthi Colombage, Country Manager, Sri Lanka and Maldives, Visa. The panel delved on Sri Lanka’s changing cyber risk environment and the need for stronger preparedness across the financial sector, with emphasis on proactive threat intelligence, real-time response capabilities, stronger information sharing, capacity building, robust regulatory frameworks and the adoption of advanced security solutions to help institutions stay ahead of emerging risks.

Waruna Dhanapala, Secretary to the Ministry of Digital Economy, said, “As Sri Lanka advances its digital transformation, cybersecurity is a national priority and a critical enabler of trust in the digital economy. The expansion of digital payments and technology-enabled commerce presents significant opportunities, but also requires coordinated action, strong safeguards and trusted partnerships. Initiatives such as the Visa Sri Lanka Cybersecurity Conclave 2026 are valuable in bringing together government, regulators, financial institutions and industry leaders to exchange insights, address emerging risks and strengthen collective resilience.  We value the role that global payments leaders such as Visa continue to play in supporting Sri Lanka’s digital ecosystem through expertise, innovation and collaboration. This conclave was a timely effort to reinforce the shared responsibility needed to build a secure, resilient and inclusive digital economy for the country.”

Commenting on the success of the conclave, Avanthi Colombage, Country Manager, Sri Lanka and Maldives, Visa, said, “As Sri Lanka’s digital economy continues to grow, cybersecurity is fundamental to building trust in digital payments. At Visa, we are committed to working closely with regulators, financial institutions and ecosystem partners to support safer, more resilient digital commerce for consumers and businesses. Strengthening cyber resilience is not the responsibility of one institution alone. It requires collaboration, preparedness and continued investment across the ecosystem. Through initiatives such as the Visa Sri Lanka Cybersecurity Conclave 2026, Visa continues to support Sri Lanka’s financial ecosystem with global expertise, practical insights and security-led solutions that help protect the future of digital commerce in Sri Lanka.”

First Capital maintains Bond Yield Outlook for 2026, identifies market recovery potential in 2027

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.