Joint Opposition seeks dialogue with CIABOC chief

Colombo, June 13 (Daily Mirror) - The Joint Opposition sought a dialogue with Committee to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC) Chairman Neal Iddawela to discuss complaints lodged with the Commission against members of the government.

In a written request, the Joint Opposition, represented by its Convenor Prof. G.L. Peiris, Lasantha Alagiyawanna of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP), Ajith Mannaperuma of the United National Party (UNP), Peshala Serasinghe of the Lanka Sama Samaja Party (LSSP), Bandula Chandrasekera of the United Republic Front, Senal Welgama of Nawa Lanka Nidahas Pakshaya, Sugeshwara Bandara of Nawa Janatha Peramuna, former MP Premnath Dollawatta and Mark Arulsamy of the Tamil Progressive Alliance, stressed the need to probe allegations made by the former SriLankan Airlines CEO, the late Kapila Chandrasena in an affidavit submitted to court prior to his death.

The letter recalled that Chandrasena had complained of undue influence exerted on him by CIABOC Director General Ranga Dissanayake. It stated that Dissanayake has been accused of acting outside the mandate of the CIABOC.

The Joint Opposition leaders also stressed the need for action on complaints alleging corrupt activities by Speaker Jagath Wickramaratne. They said no action had been taken by the CIABOC despite complaints having been lodged.

They further noted that the CIABOC had failed to take action against former Minister of Power and Energy Kumara Jayakody regarding allegations related to inferior-quality coal, despite complaints being lodged. They said Minister Jayakody should be arrested and remanded.

“The absence of such action makes one conclude that the law is not enforced on every citizen of the nation in an equal manner,” they said.

The Opposition leaders said inaction on complaints lodged against members of the government would be harmful to the CIABOC’s reputation.

They also sought a dialogue with the CIABOC chief to discuss the issue. The leaders stressed that they had sought such a dialogue because they considered it their duty towards the nation.