Nestlé Golden Chef’s Hat Competition 2026 to nurture Sri Lanka’s culinary talent

Nestlé Professional, the B2B arm of Nestlé Lanka, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Chefs Guild of Lanka and the Sri Lanka Hospitality Graduates Association to collaborate in organizing the Nestlé Golden Chef’s Hat and Nestle Golden Chef’s Hat Junior Competition 2026. This islandwide culinary competition aims to identify, nurture, and develop emerging culinary talent within Sri Lanka’s hospitality industry, reinforcing Nestlé Professional’s commitment to supporting the growth of the hospitality sector and the next generation of chefs.

The Chefs Guild of Lanka will support the Professional category of the Nestlé Golden Chef’s Hat Competition 2026, facilitating eight regional competitions across the island. These regional rounds will provide a competitive platform for professional chefs to showcase their culinary expertise while helping them to develop their culinary skills further.

In parallel, Nestlé Professional Sri Lanka, in collaboration with the Sri Lanka Hospitality Graduates Association and Chefs Guild of Lanka, will organize the Junior Nestlé Golden Chef’s Hat Competition 2026, aimed at nurturing students within Sri Lanka’s hospitality sector. The regional rounds of the junior competition will be conducted across prominent hotel schools island‑wide, creating a structured platform to identify, mentor, and inspire the young students who aspire of becoming the top chefs in the country and world-wide.

Bernie Stefan, Chairman and Managing Director of Nestlé Lanka commented, “For 120 years, Nestlé has been enriching Sri Lankan lives by unlocking the power of food and beverages to enhance quality of life. This commitment has also been demonstrated in our endeavour to strengthen Sri Lanka’s foodservice ecosystem. The Nestlé Golden Chef’s Hat Competition 2026 and Junior Competition is a platform that brings together industry expertise, education, and opportunity – empowering both professional chefs and hospitality students to reach their full potential.

Ministry of Education recognises LOLC Divi Saviya for restoring 200 schools

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.