Sevalanka Foundation and The Coca-Cola Foundation support flood-affected communities in Biyagama, Sri Lanka

With funding support from The Coca-Cola Foundation (TCCF), the Sevalanka Foundation has launched a humanitarian relief programme to support flood-affected communities in Biyagama. The initiative focuses on restoring access to safe water, healthcare services, and essential public facilities during the critical recovery period following the Cyclone Ditwah.

Working closely with the Divisional Secretariat, the program prioritizes the cleaning and rehabilitation of contaminated dug and tube wells, helping address the urgent post-flood challenge of access to safe water. This intervention will also support the cleaning and reopening of essential public spaces, including schools, and Grama Niladhari (GN) offices, enabling authorities and communities to resume daily activities safely. The Sevalanka Foundation and TCCF, as part of the initial response, have also donated water pumps to the Divisional Secretariat to support immediate water extraction and clean-up efforts.

In addition, as the second main component of the project, and based on the guidance of the Medical Officer of Health (MOH), support is being provided to MOH-operated healthcare facilities to restore access to emergency and essential medical services. This support includes sanitization, debris removal, hazard stabilization, and the provision of emergency medical supplies such essential medicines and hygiene products. Medical camps staffed by doctors and senior nurses will be conducted through MOH offices to provide prioritized groups of persons with health, nutrition and hygiene related relief items.

Sri Lanka’s 2026 economic growth predicted to be around 4-5 percent

Bourse radiates optimism as UK grants tariff-free concession to local apparel exports

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.