Golden Jubilee celebration of diplomatic relations between Holy See and Sri Lanka

Institutional Celebratory Event featuring public lecture by Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher tomorrow afternoon at Galle Face Hotel, Colombo

Solemn Mass of Thanksgiving presided over by Archbishop Gallagher and concelebrated by Catholic Bishops of Sri Lanka on 5 November at St. Lucia’s Cathedral, Kotahena

Archbishop Gallagher to visit Cathedral of Kandy and celebrate Holy Mass at Chapel of Catholic National Seminary, Ampitiya on 7 November

Holy See Secretary for Relations with States and International Organisations Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher

Sri Lanka and the Holy See will commemorate the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations this week, marking a historic milestone in the enduring friendship and cooperation between the two States.

To mark this significant occasion, Holy See Secretary for Relations with States and International Organisations (Holy See Foreign Affairs Minister) Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher will undertake an official visit to Sri Lanka from 3 to 8 November at the invitation of the Government of Sri Lanka and the Catholic Bishops’ Conference in Sri Lanka.

During his visit, Archbishop Gallagher will hold institutional meetings with the highest State authorities, reaffirming the strong diplomatic ties and shared commitment to peace, cooperation, and interreligious harmony between the Holy See and Sri Lanka. Courtesy calls are scheduled with the President Anura Kumara Disanayake, Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, and Foreign Affairs Minister Vijitha Herath.

An Institutional Celebratory Event featuring a public lecture by Archbishop Gallagher will take place tomorrow (4) afternoon at the Galle Face Hotel, Colombo, reflecting on 50 years of diplomatic relations between the Holy See and Sri Lanka and their contribution to peace, dialogue, and cooperation.

The highlight of the Golden Jubilee will be a Solemn Mass of Thanksgiving, presided over by Archbishop Gallagher and concelebrated by the Catholic Bishops of Sri Lanka, on 5 November at St. Lucia’s Cathedral, Kotahena.

The celebration will be attended by Archbishop of Colombo Malcolm Cardinal Ranjith, Government dignitaries, members of the diplomatic corps, and the faithful.

Following the Jubilee celebrations in Colombo, Archbishop Gallagher will travel to Kandy for a fraternal visit to Buddhist religious authorities, including the Temple of the Sacred Tooth Relic, symbolising the Holy See’s enduring commitment to interreligious friendship and understanding.

On 7 November, Archbishop Gallagher will visit the Cathedral of Kandy and celebrate Holy Mass at the Chapel of the Catholic National Seminary, Ampitiya.

Formal diplomatic relations between the Holy See and Sri Lanka were established on 6 September 1975 through a Papal Bull issued by Pope Paul VI, who appointed Archbishop Carlo Curis as the first Apostolic Pro Nuncio to Sri Lanka.

Since then, the Apostolic Nunciature has served as a vital bridge of faith and cooperation between the Vatican and the Sri Lankan people, with its first office located at No. 1, Gower Street, Colombo 5.

The bonds between the two States, however, trace their origins back to the 16th century, during the Portuguese Padroado system and later under the Congregation of Propaganda Fide.

Over the decades, Sri Lanka has been blessed with three Papal visits; Saint Pope Paul VI (1970), Saint Pope John Paul II (1995), and Pope Francis (2015), each reaffirming the deep spiritual and diplomatic ties between the Holy See and Sri Lanka.

The Golden Jubilee celebrations take place during the tenure of Malcolm Cardinal Ranjith and Catholic Bishops’ Conference in Sri Lanka President Bishop Harold Anthony Perera.

“On this special occasion, and amid these complex times in the international arena, we can look to the teachings of His Holiness Pope Leo XIV, who reminds us of our call to a renewed commitment to fraternity and reconciliation, invoking from God the precious gift of peace,” a spokesperson for the Catholic Bishops’ Conference said.