Myland makes three new Board appointments

Myland Developments PLC has appointed Savanth Sebastian and Ravi Goonetilleke to its Board as Independent Non-Executive Directors and Dr. Kanchana Narangoda as an Executive Director.

Sebastian has a wealth of experience in economics, financial services and investment management and presently serves as Chairman of Colombo City Holdings PLC and Director of Ambeon Capital PLC, Ambeon Holdings PC, Voguetex Ltd. and ArpicoAtaraxia Asset Management. He also served on the Board of Directors of Nations Trust Bank PLC.

Sebastian brings with him 21 years of industry experience, having carried out responsibilities for nine years as the Senior Economist within the Global Markets research team at Commonwealth Bank in Australia, advising Federal and State Governments, high net worth private and institutional clients, and internal stake holders, including Colonial First State and the Commonwealth Bank senior leadership team.

Prior to this, he spent four years working in and then managing the International trading desk for Commonwealth Securities, the stock broking division of Commonwealth Bank, Australia which transacted across 31 international markets. While in the role he was responsible for the facilitation of Strategic Trading Accounts, allowing CBA Treasury to manage risk and drive an alternative source of revenue.

He holds a Bachelor of Commerce in Actuarial Studies and Finance, is an Accredited Advisor of the Australian Stock Exchange, and a Master Practitioner of the Australian Stockbrokers and Financial Advisers Association.

Sebastian has published numerous research reports for institutional clients covering domestic and global macroeconomic policy and analysis of equity markets.

Goonetilleke is an experienced banker with over 30 years of experience across two banks. He has extensive expertise in operational and business functions, including Cash Management, Custody, Trustee and Fund Services, and Trade and Remittances.

During his 26-year tenure at Deutsche Bank AG, Colombo, he was actively involved in landmark business transactions in Cash Management and cross-border Custody, as well as Trustee and Fund Services product offerings. He has undergone extensive training in product, operations, and management across many countries in the region, including conducting country-specific product audits overseas. He was also a member of the local management team (OpCo) and retired as a Vice President.

He presently serves as the Chairman of Taprobane Investments Ltd. and Director of Ambeon Capital PLC, Ambeon Holdings PLC, and Ambeon Securities Ltd.

Goonetilleke holds a Master of Business Administration (MBA) from the University of Wales, UK.

Dr. Narangoda is currently the Group CEO/Executive Director of Ambeon Holdings PLC and Ambeon Capital PLC. Dr. Narangoda also serves as a Non-Executive Director on the respective Boards of Colombo City Holdings PLC, Eon Tec Ltd., Millennium I.T.E.S.P. Ltd., Taprobane Capital Plus Ltd., Lexinton Holdings Ltd., Lexinton Resorts Ltd., and Sherwood Capital Ltd.

His illustrious career includes serving Dankotuwa Porcelain PLC as its Chief Executive Officer, Colombo City Holdings PLC as its Chief Executive Officer/Executive Director, and Millennium IT ESP as its Executive Director. Further, under his leadership Hemas Holdings PLC and Brown and Company PLC have established multiple secondary care general hospitals in Sri Lanka. He has also been serving the Australian Council on Healthcare Standards International (ACHSI) as an International Hospital Assessor since 2012 and as the Regional Representative for South Asia since 2019.

Dr. Narangoda holds a Bachelor of Dental Surgery degree from the University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka, Master of Science (Finance and Management) from Keele University UK. He is also a Fellow Member of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA) UK and a fellow member of Certified Practicing Accountants (CPA) Australia.

As an international researcher, he has been an integral member of the research team at the International Research Collaborative - Health and Equity at the University of Western Australia specialising in healthcare pricing and is the primary author for several international research publications.