Trump pauses Iran strikes over missile shortages

The Telegraph - Donald Trump has paused plans to escalate the war on Iran after being warned that the US is running low on missiles.

For the first time in nearly two weeks, the US president called off strikes on the Islamic Republic over the weekend and has set aside plans to return to major combat operations.

The decision also allows time and space for negotiations with Iran.

Concerns were raised during a White House meeting on Friday night, according to reports.

JD Vance, the vice-president, and General Dan Caine, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, were among those who spoke out, the New York Times (NYT) reported.

Officials familiar with the deliberations told US media that concerns over dwindling supplies of air-defence munitions, particularly interceptor missiles needed to defend American bases and regional partners against Iranian ballistic missiles and drones, played a central role in the decision.

Three American soldiers were killed in Jordan last Friday when a ballistic missile slipped through American air defences fending off a barrage of Iranian missiles and drones.

Another soldier was killed in Iraq while trying to make safe a downed Iranian drone.

After 13 straight nights of US attacks on Iran, Mr Trump ordered no more strikes on Friday or Saturday night.

A department of defence source told CNN that operations are “on a hold”.

The pause came as Mr Trump also signalled he believes Tehran may now be prepared to negotiate, though Tehran continues to dig its heels in with demands to retain control of the critical Strait of Hormuz.

On Sunday, the Iranian foreign ministry said that technical and political consultations between the two sides were ongoing via Omani intermediaries. Talks over the strait were, Iran said, productive.

Only on Thursday, Mr Trump said that he was considering “a massive attack” on Iran. He described it as “one bigger than ever before. I am close to making a decision. We are all set for it”.

The Pentagon rushed more forces, weaponry and supplies to the Middle East in recent days to prepare for any escalation.

Since the campaign began, the US has damaged or destroyed an increasing number of railway bridges that civilians use but that also enable Iranian commanders to send supplies to the southern coastal region near the strait.

Officials told the NYT that increased attacks on those kinds of targets, as well as energy facilities and Iran’s nuclear sites, including Pickaxe Mountain, were still under consideration.

US officials stress that military options remain on the table should negotiations fail or were Iran to launch further attacks. However, it represents the clearest indication yet that the White House is searching for an off-ramp after five months of conflict.

There is also growing unease within Mr Trump’s inner circle over the prospect of being drawn into a prolonged regional conflict which has triggered backlash domestically.

CNN reported that close advisers had voiced concerns over both the strategic and political costs of expanding the war, particularly given the strain on US military resources, the loss of lives and uncertainty over whether further strikes would fundamentally alter Iran’s behaviour.