The Free Palestine Movement of Sri Lanka calls for safe release of Sameera

The Free Palestine Movement of Sri Lanka gathered on 19 May at 3.30 p.m. in front of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to urge the Sri Lankan government to ensure the safe release of Sri Lankan activist Sameera Mahboobdeen.

Sameera, the only Sri Lankan taking part in the Global Sumud Flotilla, was abducted in international waters on 18 May by Israeli forces and is presumed to be in Israeli custody. Her abduction was against international law.

Sameera is a mother, a medic, a first responder and a forensic psychologist. Having worked for St John Ambulance, where she has served as both an Assistant District Commissioner for St John Ambulance Kalutara District, and as a national trainer for them since 2017. She is also a first responder and a trainer for disaster response and management teams. She was serving as a medic on the Global Sumud Flotilla that was on its way to Gaza with essential humanitarian aid.

The 54 boats of the flotilla, with over 400 activists from 45 countries, sailing from Turkiye carrying aid to Gaza, have all been intercepted by Israeli forces as of morning, 20 May and all participating activists have been abducted. These actions are completely illegal under international law, specifically: UNCLOS Article 98 and the conventions on Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS, 1974) and Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR, 1979), which mandate that states are duty-bound to protect civilians in distress at sea. Furthermore, Article 8(2)(b)(xxv) of the Rome Statute designates the deliberate obstruction of humanitarian relief in conflict zones as a war crime.

The Global Sumud Flotilla is a peaceful fleet of ships attempting to break the Israeli government’s blockade of food, medicine and other aid to the people of Gaza. The interception of this mission in international waters, once again by Israel, continues to undermine nearly a century of efforts, since the end of the Second World War, to build trust in international law and the institutions that enforce them, which is needed for a globalised, rules-based world order.

Instead, over 2 and a half years since Israel began its genocidal campaign on Gaza, a global order based on power, oppression and complete impunity, which utilises hate and divisive language to alienate its victims from the consciousness of all those watching around the world, has emerged. To survive such a global order, activists from the Free Palestine Movement believe that Sri Lankans must recognise the nature of Israel›s actions in Gaza as colonial violence, and understand that standing on the side of the Palestinians is not about standing with or against a particular religious or ethnic group but standing with oppressed people, against their oppressors seeking to take control of national resources and strategic geolocations.

The Free Palestine Movement of Sri Lanka also urged Sri Lankans both at home and overseas to share Sameera’s pre-recorded message in the event of capture, which was released on her social media on 18 May following her capture and to follow updates on her captivity till her safe release along with the rest of the flotilla crew.

Previous flotillas, two of which included prominent activist Greta Thunberg, were unsuccessful. Yet activists continue to mobilise with a land convoy crossing through Africa, taking place right now. Such global, community-led initiatives have become essential and exemplary actions for people around the world who are witnessing the injustice happening and are looking to leverage solidarity and nonviolent action to resist this new wave of violent colonialism by Israel and the United States. By participating in this flotilla through Sameera, Sri Lanka has united with the people from across the world looking for a way to ensure a just and equitable future for us all.