State-owned firm to manage multimodal transport hubs

The Cabinet of Ministers has approved the establishment of a 100% State-owned public limited company to oversee the management, operations, and development of the country’s multimodal transport hubs.

The move is part of its efforts to create a more efficient, integrated, and user-friendly public transport system.

The new entity will be created in accordance with the provisions of the Public Financial Management Act, No. 44 of 2024 and will be a Treasury Ltd., (Public) Company directly controlled by the Transport Ministry.

The decision follows Cabinet discussions held on 29 December 2025, during which the need for a permanent institutional framework to coordinate the operation, administration, standardisation, business development, and national-level policy planning of the transport hubs was identified.

The Government has identified multimodal transport hubs as a key solution to improving connectivity between buses, trains, taxis, and other modes of transport, enabling smoother passenger transfers and better integration across the national transport network.

At present, the Makumbura and Kadawatha multimodal transport hubs are operational, while construction is ongoing at the Anuradhapura (South) and Kandy hubs.

“Following consultations involving officials from the Finance, Planning and Economic Development Ministry, the Transport, Highways and Urban Development Ministry, and other relevant State departments, it was recommended that a public limited company, fully owned and controlled by the General Treasury, be established under the Ministry in charge of transport,” Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa said at the post-Cabinet meeting media briefing last week.

He said it is a priority objective of the Government to make the urban and inter-urban passenger transport system in Sri Lanka more efficient, integrated and user-friendly.

“The move has now paved the way for this dedicated State-run institution to oversee the operation and future expansion of the country’s integrated transport hub network,” he added.