Piling work of Home Lands’ flagship Pentara project finishes

Construction of Pentara Residencies Thummulla Handiya, Home Lands Group’s iconic flagship development in the Colombo city, is well on track driven by Home Lands’ unwavering commitment to delivering projects on time. D P Jayasinghe Piling Company (Pvt) Ltd and Sanken Construction’s San Piling (Pvt) Ltd; were chosen by Home Lands to carry out piling work of this mega Colombo city-based development in conformity with the highest standards. High quality piling work of this award-winning project is nowcomplete. With piling work completed, construction of this mega project is on plan and well underway.

“We are pleased to announce that construction progress of Pentara Residencies is well on track, with 100 percent of the piling work completed on time,” said Nalin Herath, Chairman of Home Lands Group of Companies.

“We remain committed to delivering this landmark development on schedule, setting new benchmarks for luxury living in Colombo.”

Nestled in the heart of Colombo and set to soar 40 levels high, Pentara Residencies - Thummulla Handiya will effectively redefine the Colombo skyline. Thummulla Handiya is among the most sought-after locations in Colombo, bordering Colombo 3, 4, 5 and the elite Colombo 7. With leading schools, hospitals, shopping malls, and essential services all within easy reach, it offers unmatched convenience.

Featuring Sri Lanka’s first 5-star Floating Sky Restaurant, a cantilevered Sky Pool, an iconic Sky Bridge, and an unprecedented collection of Deluxe Apartments, Sky Villas, Penthouses, and Sky Mansions, the development sets a new benchmark in elevated living.

Complemented by over 45 star-class amenities and breathtaking views from every residence, it delivers an unparalleled lifestyle defined by comfort, exclusivity, and architectural excellence. Seamlessly blending innovation with luxury, this landmark development redefines modern, ultra-luxurious living, offering residents a truly world-class living experience.

With over 80 percent units sold since its launch in June 2025, Pentara Residencies reflects the growing demand for luxury living in the heart of Colombo by the most reputed developer renowned for timely delivery of projects upholding the highest quality standards. Home Lands has delivered a staggering 3,750 resort apartments and villas across a portfolio of themed mega residential developments with 500 more units ready for delivery within the next 6 months, while a further 2,200 plus units are currently under construction across 8 futuristic mega lifestyle development projects, underscoring the company’s scale, momentum, and continued market leadership.

Home Lands, Sri Lanka’s number one, most trusted and most innovative developer, has been shaping the nation’s real estate landscape with a legacy built on trust, innovation, and excellence. Home Lands is the pioneer of resort-style residential developments in Sri Lanka and continues to redefine modern living, setting new benchmarks in quality, design, and lifestyle. As a fully integrated group of 14 companies, including its own construction arm, Heyraa Construction, holding the highest CS2 grading from CIDA, Home Lands delivers end-to-end solutions across real estate, construction, property management, and lifestyle creation, ensuring uncompromised quality, innovation, and customer satisfaction.

With a growing global presence and offices in Australia, Dubai, and London, Home Lands serves both local and international clients, delivering landmark residential projects across the country.