Trinity Power Cripples Pathana

May.24 (Mirror Sports) - Trinity made it to the top of Group A of the Dialog Schools Rugby tournament in style when they outclassed Isipathana by 36 points to 12 in the deciding match played at Havelock Park.

Trinity, having led 17-7 at lemons, made up their points through three goals and three tries to one goal and one try scored by Isipathana.

In fact, the first half saw Trinity being tied down by the Isipathana defenders and being restricted to 12 points, but they burst open in the second half as they succeeded in chalking up 24 points while Isipathana was able to add only five points.

Skipper and fullback Shan Althaf led the Trinity attack as he went over for back-toback tries within the space of four minutes whilst booting over one of those himself, which made things uneasy for Isipathana.

The outcome of the clash was much in favour of the Lions before the starting whistle was blown, and they kept up to their reputation, and the combination of the team made it look easy for them.

It was Isipathana who made the first scoring, which took a good 19 minutes with flyhalf Nimantha Sandeepa going over for the try and also making the conversion.

But two minutes later Trinity succeeded in reducing the deficit, and from there on it was a battle for the ball between the two sides, and again Trinity succeeded in increasing their lead with winger Dimath Ambepitiya going over for an unconverted try to make it 17-7 in favour of Trinity, which stood the score at the breather. On resumption, Trinity settled down and went on the rampage with skipper Shan Althaf leading the way with a try in the third minute, which he himself converted, and then went over for another try four minutes later, which he failed to convert.

Though Isipathana put in some effort, they were unable to make any headway, and in the 21st minute, with Isipathana in their opponents’ territory, Trinity’s winger Menula Yaddehige went over for a peach of a try by intercepting an Isipathana pass and running over 70 metres to plant a try under the post, which gave flyhalf Abdul Malik an easy kick at goal.

With Trinity way ahead with the score at 39-7 in favour of them, a try in the 30th minute by flyhalf Nimantha Sandeepa, which was his second of the match, was not going to make any difference as Trinity cruised through with ease to remain unbeaten with their fourth successive win.