Farmers’ protests

Rice growers are up in arms, unable to sell their produce at fair prices. They are also demanding that fertiliser be made available at affordable prices. Instead of listening to them and making a serious effort to redress their grievances, the government has claimed that their protests are politically motivated; a deputy minister has gone to the extent of provoking protesting farmers by calling them rotgut addicts. The JVP/NPP has totally mismanaged farmers’ protests, which are likely to snowball. One may recall that it was farmers who launched the opening salvo against President Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s government, whose experiment with organic farming created a severe shortage of fertiliser.

Farmers’ associations are flaying the government for having imported a large amount of rice while locally produced rice stocks remain unsold, instead of buying their produce through the Paddy Marketing Board (PMD), whose warehouses they say remain closed. The government claims that it has imported only the varieties of rice that are in short supply in the local market, but farmers are convinced otherwise.

Why farmers are so resentful is understandable. They are complaining of exploitation by a cartel of rice millers, with the government doing nothing to safeguard their interests. Rice growers are struggling to make ends meet. Most of them are neck deep in debt. But the big-time rice millers are becoming richer. They are buying Rolls-Royces and even helicopters and indulging in a vulgar display of wealth while some paddy cultivators are losing their houses put up as collateral for loans. The JVP-led NPP, which promised to liberate the farming community from the clutches of powerful millers and ruthless microfinance companies and enable them to obtain bank loans without collateral, has reneged on its pledge.

Successive governments have furthered the interests of big-time millers by importing rice close to the commencement of harvesting seasons, according to farmers’ associations and independent researchers. Unfortunately, the JVP-NPP government, which came to power, with the help of farmers among others, promising them the stars and the moon, stands accused of helping large-scale millers maximise their profits at the expense of both cultivators and consumers. We have written extensively about how haphazard rice imports which governments resort to, claiming to overcome rice shortages, affect the interests of the farming community.

As harvesting seasons near, millers create shortages of rice. Instead of taking action to trace hoarded rice, governments readily import rice for the benefit of politicians and bureaucrats rather than anyone else. When the imported rice arrives, millers slowly release their stocks into the market bringing the prices of rice down temporarily and using that opportunity to purchase paddy for a song. The PMD, which the JVP/NPP promised to revitalise to compete with private millers, does precious little to help farmers. When locally produced rice reaches the market, the demand for imported rice decreases, as Sri Lankans prefer local rice. Eventually, the stocks of imported rice rot in government warehouses and end up as animal feed. Allegations that rice is used as a primary brewing ingredient by beer manufactures have sparked a major controversy and economic concerns.

Allegations also abound that influential millers delay the release of bank loans that small and medium scale millers apply for to purchase paddy so that they can buy most of the paddy at uncompetitive prices. No government has done anything about these practices detrimental to the interests of rice growers and consumers, for obvious reasons, according to researchers. Wealthy rice millers bankroll election campaigns and have politicians eating out of their hands. The incumbent government launched a programme to clear unauthorised structures in the reservations of the irrigation tanks in the North Central province. But that initiative has withered on the vine for all intents and purposes because a hotel belonging to a powerful rice miller has encroached on the reservation of a tank in Polonnaruwa.

The government, like its predecessors, claims that it has to be mindful of the interests of consumers and keep the prices of rice at reasonable levels and therefore cannot meet farmers’ demand for increasing the threshold price of paddy. On the face of it, this argument does not look wholly untenable, but the fact remains that it is mostly market manipulations by powerful rice millers and high mark-ups that keep the prices of rice high. Governments do not dare address these issues.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.