PickMe unlocks over Rs.22bn for micro-entrepreneurs in 1QFY27

Digital Mobility Solutions Lanka PLC (PickMe) generated Rs.22 billion in income for its network of independent driver and merchant earners during the first quarter of FY2026/27.

This reflects a robust 50 percent year-on-year (YoY) growth, reinforcing the company’s position as a key driver of Sri Lanka’s digital economy.

Furthermore, the platform contributed Rs.773 million in national taxes during the quarter, maintaining a strong operational momentum, despite the temporary fuel supply disruptions stemming from the Middle Eastern conflict.

The company reported revenue of Rs.2.5 billion for the quarter, a 40 percent increase from Rs.1.8 billion recorded in the corresponding period last year.

Despite the fuel rationing and the operational challenges experienced during the quarter, the revenue growth was driven by a 40 percent YoY increase in average monthly unique consumers, an all-time high during the quarter, reflecting the continued expansion of PickMe’s marketplace ecosystem.

his growth translated into a 43 percent YoY increase in total platform movements, while the gross transaction value, the total value of trips and deliveries facilitated through the platform, increased 48 percent YoY to Rs.25.3 billion, from Rs.17.0 billion in the corresponding quarter last year.

Over 85 percent of this value flowed directly to PickMe’s network of independent drivers and merchant earners, highlighting the platform’s growing role in creating livelihoods, supporting entrepreneurship and enabling digital commerce across Sri Lanka.

While the YoY growth remained strong, the company noted that the sequential performance moderated from the exceptionally strong fourth quarter of FY2025/26, which has historically been PickMe’s strongest quarter, due to the seasonal demand.

Net revenue eased by one percent, primarily due to the fuel supply constraints and quota-related disruptions that temporarily affected driver availability. The higher fuel prices also weighed on consumer affordability, contributing to softer trip volumes during the quarter.

Nevertheless, the average monthly unique consumers continued to grow by 3 percent quarter-on-quarter, demonstrating the resilience of customer engagement, despite the temporary market disruption. Net profit for the quarter increased 45 percent YoY to Rs.631 million, from Rs.437 million in the corresponding period of the previous financial year. Sequentially the net profit moderated by 10 percent compared with the record fourth quarter of FY2025/26, reflecting softer marketplace volumes, higher IT infrastructure and subscription costs and the impact of the currency depreciation.