‘Safe Mobility for 4All & 4Life’

The Federation Internationale de L’ Automobile’s (FIA) ‘Safe Mobility for 4All &4Life’ global initiative is a collaborative project between the International Automobile Federation (FIA), the United Nations Institute for Training & Research (UNITAR) and the FIA Foundation.

The main objective of this programme is a joint capacity – building initiative of FIA & UNITAR, bringing together FIA member clubs and relevant government stakeholders from across the Asia – Pacific Region to support the design and implementation of National Road Safety initiatives.

Since the Automobile Association of Ceylon(AAC) is a club under the FIA and engages in road safety activities & programmes, under the UN Decade of Action 2010 – 2020 ; extended 2021-2030 along with the collaboration of the Road Development Authority(RDA) and representatives for the government, it was invited to participate in this programme.

‘Safe Mobility for 4All &4Life’ originated in Chiangmai, Thailand in October 2025 and thereafter a second Face- to -Face Workshop took place on 5 th & 6 th March 2026 in Manila, Philippines. During this period the participants had the opportunity to present the final outcomes of their national projects developed under this programme, shared experiences and lessons from the mentoring phase, engaged in discussions with international road safety experts and programme partners.

Organizers of the ‘Safe Mobility for ‘4All & 4Life’ formally invited AAC to their Fellowship Programme & Graduation event, which took place on the 13 th & 14 th July 2026 in Geneva, Switzerland. For this event Australia (Canberra), Australia (Tasmania), Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Nepal, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Uzbekistan, Vietnam Hanoi), Vietnam (Ho Chi Minh City) were also invited.

The AAC was represented by Dhammika Attygalle, President ; Devapriya Hettiarachchi, Secretary. All the clubs that attended this event submitted their road safety projects. AAC too submitted its mobility & road safety project, namely, the improvement of Road Safety at Pedestrian Crossings in highly Pedestrianized Areas in the Western Province Sri Lanka. This project aims to improve safety at 15 High Risk Pedestrian Crossings in the Western Province through the implementation of Safe Systems Interventions, including High Visibility Road Markings, enhanced signage, dedicated lighting, amber flashing warning systems, and speed management measures besides conducting road safety awareness programmes at five schools.

The projects submitted by the countries will have their funding to implement their programmes from UNITAR, who will monitor the progress of the projects submitted by countries. (AAC)

Ceylon Chamber to host business networking session with visiting Indian Chamber of Commerce delegation

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.