Sri Lankan business leaders explore strategic opportunities in Cambodia

A Sri Lankan trade delegation recently concluded a strategic mission to Phnom Penh, Cambodia, coinciding with the Cambodia Agriculture Exhibition. The visit was organised by the Sri Lanka – Greater Mekong Business Council (SLGMBC) of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce and initiated by the Honorary Consul of the Kingdom of Cambodia in Sri Lanka, Ruwan Waidyaratne.

During the visit Waidyaratne also met with key officials of the Consular Affairs Department including Seng Socheat – Director, Consular Affairs Department. The delegation was warmly welcomed by Neak Oknha Kith Meng, President of the Cambodian Chamber of Commerce, who reaffirmed Cambodia’s strong support for foreign direct investment and encouraged Sri Lanka to advocate for a direct flight between the two countries to boost tourism, trade, and travel. In turn, the Sri Lankan delegation invited Cambodian companies to explore emerging opportunities in Sri Lanka’s evolving economic landscape.

The mission included an extensive briefing from the Cambodian Investment Board (CIB) under the Council for the Development of Cambodia (CDC). CIB officials highlighted Cambodia’s favourable investment climate, fully dollarised economy, and efficient investment registration process, completed within 20 working days. The delegation learned about the benefits of Cambodia’s 2021 Law on Investment, including three to nine years of income tax exemptions, VAT exemptions for purchases from local suppliers, and enhanced tax deductions of up to 150 percent for research, development, and human capital initiatives. Following the briefing, the Sri Lankan delegation agreed to organise a virtual roadshow for investors, a proposal welcomed by the CIB.

The programme also featured a meeting with Prak David, Secretary of State of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. Discussions highlighted opportunities in premium rice varieties such as the award-winning Phka Rumduol, cashew production – where Cambodia ranks third globally with its high-yield M23 variety – and agrifood processing, a sector poised for expansion with strong government support.

LAUGFS Rubber clinches Silver at NCPC Awards 2025 for Cleaner Production Excellence

South Asia’s first-ever Reggae Music Festival “ONE LOVE 2026” set to ignite Bentota

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.