American First Ladies as Authors

The title of Vanessa Friedman’s November 19 article in the NYT caught my attention immediately. It announced “Michelle Obama’s New Book is a Historical Document dressed up as a Coffee Table tome.”

The book’s title is The Look and Friedman’s assessment of it is that “The book should be studied by generations to come because of what it reveals not about fashion but about politics.” She comments further that “It is a lot of things and an Amazon bestseller. It is a photo book full of fashion. It is the story of the expectations that were heaped upon the first Black First Lady. And it is the third installment of a trilogy of books by Mrs Obama that focus on self-realization, including her memoir, her advice on overcoming adversity, and this time, a meditation on the power of clothes. But most of all, it is a historical document, capturing a pivotal moment in the evolution of the role of First Lady when clothing became an even bigger part of communication. When, in other words, dress became an officially recognized part of the job. That’s a bigger deal than it might appear.”

. Mrs Obama was the first First Lady to have a stylist on the East Wing payroll to define the public personality of the president’s wife from informal public appearances to grand White House state dinners; even of outdoor activities like gardening with her two daughters; and official visits to other countries like meeting Queen Elizabeth II in Buckingham Palace and/or Windsor. Their rapport was quick and strong unlike when the young queen felt slightly bowled over by Jackie Kennedy, the then fashion icon of the time, accompanying her husband President John F Kennedy. Michelle’s fashion adviser and arbiter of what she wore was Meredith Koop who was nicknamed Valet. The job of the two was not easy. Michelle had to, particularly as a black, be cautious of her every move and outfit she wore as she had to represent all sides of a ‘fractious country’. Thus the onus of her appearance was even more than that of other First Ladies. The stakes had changed as regards clothes VVIPs wore, as Friedman notes.

Previous First Ladies such as Jackie Kennedy, Nancy Reagan and Hillary Clinton would have realized the importance of their dress in people’s assessment of them and the important public role they played.

Each worked with a designer, probably paid by them. Thus they had Oleg Cassini (Jackie), James Galanos (Nancy- probably from Hollywood) and Oscar de la Renta (Hillary). Sure the simplest First Lady was Rosalyn Carter from peanut country in the South – Georgia – who was more concerned about her image as an activist and ordinary American.

These fairly recent White House chief female residents have been preceded by First Ladies who took pen to paper and were published. I was surprised that googling yielded14 previous wives of presidents who had been authors – mostly of memoirs, historical accounts and even children’s books. Maybe also of causes they espoused such as the welfare of the disadvantaged. Two names stand out: Eleanor Roosevelt, and Laura Bush – their periods in the White House being 1933-1945 and 2001-2009 respectively.

was not only a highly educated professional but also a fairly copious author. Her two best known and widely read and praised books were It takes a village and other lessons children teach us (1966) and her 2017 memoir of her experiences as the Democratic Party’s nominee with her opponent being Donald Trump in the 2016 presidential elections, This was her seventh book with her publisher Simon and Schuster.

Hillary Clinton’s It takes a Village … deals with the importance of community and collective responsibility in child rearing and development. Inspired by an African proverb, she includes personal anecdotes of her family growing up; reports on child development; and examples of community models to argue that a village’s support is crucial for children to grow into caring and resilient adults. Thus the main theme of the book is that raising a child requires the support of the community, not just their immediate family. This fact is well borne out by our experience. When we grew up – we meaning our generation and even the next – we lived in extended families. Many of our children’s generation and modern families are confined to children and their parents only and thus the widespread use of drugs and children nowadays suffering mental instability. We felt so secure and happy with no gadgets of today, particularly social media nonexistent then.

A tenth anniversary edition of It takes a Village was published featuring an updated introduction by the author and a separate picture book version.

Michelle Obama’s three most noteworthy books are her memoir –Becoming – 2018, detailing her life from childhood to her husband becoming the president of the US for two terms; the follow-up advice book The Light we carry – 2022; and American grown: the story of the White House kitchen garden and gardens across America – 2012. Her 2025 book The Look may become her greatest bestseller in which, through styles and fashions as observed by her, she surmises clothes have much deeper relevance and meaning.

The book is more a historical relation of subtle nuances of life, attitudes and times of American First Ladies. In American Grown Michelle, through the gardens of vegetables etc she created on the vast grounds of the White House, promotes healthy eating across America mainly through home gardens. The light we carry offers practical wisdom and strategies for navigating uncertainty and finding strength in difficult times.

(NOTE: The writer has read none of the books mentioned in the article, but plenty of reviews and articles about them and their authors) Nan

Lovers flee as shortcut through Mount Lavinia cemetery is disturbed by ‘ghosts’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.