LOLC Insurance advocates and supports breast cancer care

In line with Breast Cancer Awareness Month in October, and as part of its efforts to extend its commitment beyond insurance protection, LOLC General Insurance and LOLC Life Assurance joined hands with the Roshan Mahanama Trust (RMT) and the Indira Cancer Trust to strengthen the fight against breast cancer. Demonstrating a strong sense of social responsibility, LOLC Insurance presented a special fund contribution to the Roshan Mahanama Trust to support underprivileged cancer patients across Sri Lanka.

To further reinforce this cause, a special QR code was also launched during the event, enabling LOLC Insurance employees to contribute towards the ongoing support of cancer patients and help sustain this meaningful initiative.

Speaking at the event, Mr. Kithsiri Gunawardena, the Chairman of LOLC Insurance stated, “At LOLC Insurance, our responsibility goes beyond providing protection through insurance. It extends to protecting lives through awareness, compassion, and collective action. Through this initiative, conducted together with the Roshan Mahanama Trust and the Indira Cancer Trust, we are proud to support both our employees and the wider community. This programme reflects our belief in creating a lasting impact through knowledge and empathy.”

Adding to the sentiment, Mr. Roshan Mahanama, Founder of the Roshan Mahanama Trust, remarked, “we are truly grateful for the continuous support of LOLC Insurance, which allows the Trust to expand its initiatives across Sri Lanka, including raising breast cancer awareness through efforts such as our notable campaign, ‘On Wednesdays We Wear Pink’. This campaign encourages individuals to wear pink each Wednesday and practise TLC (Touch, Look, Check) for early detection. Together, through awareness, early detection, and community engagement, we can save lives and continue spreading hope.’’

SLT Group continues 2025 profitability with strong Q3 and 9-Months results

EduViz International unveils innovative platform to navigate study abroad opportunities

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.