From Que Sera, Sera … to QR

The JVP-NPP government has finally brought itself to swallow its pride and introduce the QR-based fuel rationing system to face the current global oil crisis. It is notoriously slow on the draw and arrogantly dismissive of sound counsel. About three and a half months ago, its delayed response stood in the way of effective disaster management in the immediate aftermath of the landfall of Cyclone Ditwah.

The government mismanaged the current fuel crisis for two weeks. It rejected out of hand calls for fuel rationing when long lines of vehicles began to appear outside filling stations on the first day of the US-Israeli airstrikes on Iran. We repeatedly pointed out that there was no shame in rationing fuel during a global oil crisis. Instead of introducing the QR-based fuel sales to manage the meagre petroleum reserves by preventing panic buying and hoarding and curtailing consumption, the government, in its wisdom, kept on releasing fuel to the market. Maybe the JVP/NPP leaders considered it infra dig to introduce the QR-based fuel sales lest the credit for managing the crisis should go to their immediate predecessors, who introduced that method. It is also possible that they were all at sea due to inexperience or they resigned themselves to fatalism, hoping that the fuel crisis would resolve itself.

An absurd attempt is being made in some quarters to liken the current fuel crisis to the one we experienced in 2022. The two situations are as different as chalk and cheese. The 2022 fuel crisis was local, but the current one is global. In 2022, the SLPP government bankrupted the economy, leaving the country with no forex for fuel imports. Today, the country has foreign currency for oil imports, but the Iran conflict has disrupted the global oil supply.

The government craftily jacked up fuel prices the other day, claiming that they were intended to curtail fuel consumption. Thereafter, it resorted to fuel rationing, which is bound to cause severe difficulties to the public, but some fuel is certainly much better than no fuel at all. If not for rationing, the vast majority of motorists would have had to wait in never-ending queues outside filling stations for days on end and return home empty-handed the way they did at the height of the economic crisis in 2022.

Trishaw and school van operators are complaining that their weekly fuel quotas are not sufficient. The government should look into their complaints and redress their grievances. There were complaints of some teething problems yesterday. Many people found it difficult to obtain new QR codes, and some filling stations complained of technical issues. These problems must be sorted out expeditiously. There are also some holdouts, but they are bound to fall in line.

Stern action must be taken to prevent the emergence of a black market in fuel. A wag says Sri Lanka is now as oil rich as Iran’s Kharg Island, thanks to numerous hidden caches of fuel. Every trishaw doubled as a mini bowser to stockpile fuel during the past two weeks or so. It is now up to the police to seize hoarded fuel and bring the culprits to justice. There is also the possibility of some filling station operators themselves hoarding fuel and profiteering. They allegedly did so in 2022.

There are other measures that need to be adopted to manage the fuel crisis, which shows no signs of going away any time soon, with US President Donald Trump acting like a bull in a china shop. Countries like Pakistan have adopted methods such as work from home and shorter work weeks without pay reductions. Technology can play a pivotal role in helping reduce fuel consumption. There are many single-occupancy or low-occupancy vehicles on the Sri Lankan roads. A car-pooling app can be created to enable several commuters to share one vehicle, thereby reducing fuel consumption, traffic congestion and carbon emissions. We are not short of IT mavens capable of helping evolve a technological solution to the issue of underutilised vehicle capacity on the road.

A long-term solution to the energy crisis is obviously to reduce the country’s fossil fuel dependency. It defies comprehension why Sri Lanka, blessed with abundant sunshine throughout the year, continues to burn millions of tons of fossil fuel a year for transport, cooking, cooling and lighting. Every house must be equipped to harvest and store solar energy, while the use of electric vehicles is promoted as a national priority.

The country is experiencing a severe cooking gas shortage as well despite government politicians’ rhetoric, denials, claims and assurances. It is public knowledge that many people have several gas cylinders each and stock up on cooking gas. LPG dealers are also notorious for hoarding gas and selling it at black market rates at the expense of many ordinary citizens who languish in queues in vain. The QR-based quota system can be extended to LPG sales as well while raids are conducted to seize hoarded gas stocks.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.