Turning ecological threat into opportunity: ‘Hyacinthesis’ Accelerator kicks off

Artisans at work at J.J. Products – Ehetuwewa, Kurunegala, a women-led water hyacinth craft enterprise

TFGL and GLX announce Cohort 1 for national Water Hyacinth project

Water Hyacinth poised to create scalable economic growth avenues for SL

Project Hyacinthesis engaged in dialogue with SL Govt. and private stakeholders to change the ‘Water Hyacinth Ordinance of 1909’.

The Foundation For A Good Life Ltd. (TFGL), in partnership with Good Life X (GLX), actively repositions the invasive Water Hyacinth via the lens of responsible management and utilisation to turn the environmental threat into a valuable regenerative raw material. The Accelerator is supported through Scott Dunn’s ‘Partnership for Nature’ - a collaboration facilitated by the Conservation Collective, administered by the Lanka Environment Fund (LEF). Curated as an eight-month, market-driven program was designed to transform Sri Lanka’s growing Water Hyacinth problem into a source of sustainable livelihoods and circular innovation.

While Sri Lanka is still in the early stages of adopting Water Hyacinth as a viable material, a diverse mix of artisans, entrepreneurs, and community-led innovators has been selected. This included already established enterprises utilising Water Hyacinth-based craft, as well as organisations working with similar natural raw materials that were yet to experiment with Water Hyacinth to explore new possibilities through craft, material innovation, and circular value chains.

Speaking on the initiative, The Foundation For A Good Life Ltd. Business Lead Expert Prabuddha Batuwatte noted: “Cohort 1 of the accelerator program is designed to work with enterprises and artisan communities across Sri Lanka. Aiding them in the development of market-ready handicrafts, fashion, and home décor items using Water Hyacinth as a primary material. With circularity in mind - the aim is to pair material innovation with structured business, design, and market support.”

Following a rigourous shortlisting process and diagnostic visits, six [06] Small and Medium Scale Enterprises (SMEs) from across the island have officially been onboarded (‘Cohort 1’) for the program.

Cohort 1 of the accelerator program is designed to work with enterprises and artisan communities across Sri Lanka to develop market-ready handicrafts, fashion, and home décor items using Water Hyacinth as a primary material - pairing material innovation with structured business, design, and market support.

Participating Enterprises include: Ima Water Hyacinth Products – Beliatta, Hambantota (A niche-scale craft enterprise by T.P. Imalka Rasadi); the Centre for Alternative Technologies (CAT) – Nallur, Jaffna (A locally rooted organisation by Rakulan Kandasamy); J.J. Products – Ehetuwewa, Kurunegala (A seasoned Water Hyacinth craft enterprise by Waduge Niluka Jayanthi); Kumari Athkam – Galgamuwa, Kurunegala (A well-established Water Hyacinth-based craft enterprise by I. M. Dhammika Priyadarshani Kumari); Sustain U – Bandaragama, Kalutara (A homegrown venture by Kasuni Chamudika,; and Pradeepa Eco-Products – Bingiriya, Kurunegala (An emerging enterprise by Manik Dhewage Pradeepa Madupani). Participants were onboarded via a kick-off workshop facilitated by Program Lead Lonali Rodrigo, introducing supply chain and marketing fundamentals. A follow-up design workshop, conducted in partnership with City School of Architecture (CSA), brought together participants, artisans, and ten [10] Foundation-level students to ideate products. In addition, participants receive mentorship in business planning, responsible material sourcing, innovative design, and marketing fundamentals - building regenerative value chains through collaborative learning.

The program’s retail partners include Lady J and Pendi, Isla Homeware and Alindaya, and Resplendent Ceylon.

Parallel to program activities, Project Hyacinthesis is tackling a structural challenge: the Water Hyacinth Ordinance of 1909 - which prohibits the plant’s import, possession, and cultivation, mandating destruction wherever it appears. Project Hyacinthesis successfully demonstrates that invasive species management and socio-economic development can be complementary. To chart a clear reform pathway, with the goal to amend existing legislation, the project has engaged Dr. Ananda Mallawatantri and Dr. Chethika Gunasiri. Ongoing policy dialogue with Sri Lankan Government and private stakeholders are focused on sharing insights on the potential for Water Hyacinth as an export material, and an untapped resource to boost Sri Lanka’s economic growth.