India to support Sri Lanka Army to develop AI capabilities

Colombo, Sep. 11 (Daily Mirror) - Indian Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, who visited Sri Lanka, announced that India would work together with Sri Lanka to create ‘an Artificial Intelligence (AI) lab’ for the Sri Lankan Army to enhance its capabilities.

Making his remarks at an evening reception on board Indian Naval Ship (INS) Udaygiri on Wednesday, he said that he had held “extremely productive and fruitful discussions” with President Anura Kumara Dissanayake.

The MoUs signed on Wednesday are related to the upgrading of L70 guns for the Sri Lankan Air Force and cooperation between the National Cadet Corps and the National Defence Colleges of the two countries.

“It was among the first responders to bring help during the devastating Cyclone Ditwah, along with INS Vikrant, India's flagship aircraft carrier. India and Sri Lanka are not only long-standing friends and neighbours connected to our shared cultural, historical and civilizational heritage, but also crucial partners in ensuring the safety and security of the Indian Ocean.

“Friendship of the Ocean does not divide us, but connects us through a unique and everlasting bond of deep, people-to-people connection.

“This forms the basis of our neighbourhood for the future. A neighbour is always the one who comes to your help, not only as a friend, a yogi, but also a strong reaffirmation of deep friendship and affection. It is not a formality, but a commitment, a promise to keep that we are always there through thick and thin,” he said.

Meanwhile, the President’s Media Division (PMD) said that President Dissanayake briefed the Indian Defence Minister on Sri Lanka’s recently launched islandwide programme to combat drug trafficking. The President conveyed to Mr. Singh that “Sri Lanka expects India’s fullest support in its efforts to combat the illicit drugs menace”.

At the reception, the visiting Indian Minister mingled with invitees, including Sri Lanka’s former cricketing stars Aravinda de Silva, Sanath Jayasuriya and Chaminda Vaas.

Labour Minister Dr. Anil Jayantha Fernando said that Sri Lanka was pleased to note that defence relations between the two countries had been steadily growing stronger over the years, with the Armed Forces of Sri Lanka and India maintaining close and professional engagement.

The close and dynamic relationship between the two countries has also been reflected in frequent high-level exchanges in business affairs. The State visit of Prime Minister Narendra Modi to Sri Lanka and the State visit of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake to India have provided important opportunities to further strengthen their partnership and advance their shared priorities.

The relationship between Sri Lanka and India has a long history of culture and shared civilization and heritage, he said.

He said that India’s sustained economic growth and advancement in technology had created opportunities for sustainable and inclusive economic growth in Sri Lanka.

“We foresee high potential for strengthening partnerships and collaborations with India in areas such as bilateral trade, investment, tourism, energy, logistics and technology, which have the potential to strengthen long-term economic resilience and uplift the prosperity of people,” he said.