A bid to hose down the Augean stables

A pilot project has been launched to enable passengers to use bank cards to pay bus fares on some long-distance routes. This is a long-felt need, and it is hoped that the new scheme will be expanded to cover all bus routes gradually. Teething problems are bound to crop up as the new system gets underway, and they must not be allowed to stand in the way of the continuation of digital payment of bus fares.

President of the Lanka Bus Owners’ Association Gemunu Wijeratne has been at the forefront of a campaign to have a digital fare payment system introduced by successive governments, albeit in vain. Curiously, he has expressed doubts about the success of the pilot project currently underway. He knows bus conductors for what they really are more than anyone else does, and his argument that it is ill-advised to allow conductors to handle the card-reading machines is not without merit. Ideally, there should be no conductors at all on buses, but the public transport sector is so chaotic that it is not possible to collect fares in crowded buses without them. So, the success of the new fare payment system will largely hinge on the elimination of the factors that have made bus conductors indispensable.

Wijeratne’s concerns are not unfounded. Sri Lankans’ brains are hardwired to work around systems. Bus conductors know more than one way to shoe a horse, and they will go to great lengths to rig the digital payment system or make it fail. Vigilance, public cooperation and strict regulation are essential for the success of the new fare payment system.

It is alleged that conductors siphon off a considerable portion of the daily turnover. A saying popular among bus workers is that anyone who can’t have a gold chain around his neck, after working for three months as a bus conductor, is not worth his salt. It is also popularly said that the bus owner sinks a well, the driver draws water and the conductor bathes. Many a true word is said to be spoken in jest. If the bus conductors’ sordid operations can be brought to an end, the private bus owners and the Sri Lanka Transport Board will stand to gain immensely.

Most buses in Sri Lanka are not worthy of the name as former Cabinet Minister Champika Ranawaka has rightly pointed out; they are merely lorry chassis fitted with seats. Only buses exclusively designed for passenger transport allow orderly boarding and alighting and digital payment of fares, without conductors. The need for phasing out the existing jalopies and replacing them with modern passenger buses cannot be overstated.

Meanwhile, the digital payment system is also expected to be an antidote to extortion; private bus operators complain that they have to pay extortionist rings daily, and the protection money accounts for a big chunk of their revenue. Thanks to their political connections, extortionists have been able to defeat some half-hearted attempts by successive governments to neutralise them. It is incumbent upon the JVP-led NPP government to end this menace. Former President of the Matara Private Bus Owners’ Association Aruna Kalpage revealed yesterday that private buses could not ply between Matara and Colombo, without paying protection money about 20 times a day. The same is more or less true of the buses operating on other roads.

Extortionists working for dangerous underworld figures operate openly in bus stations, as is public knowledge. These characters must be made to face the full force of the law. One can only hope that the NPP government will order a crackdown on these anti-social elements and liberate the private bus service from their clutches.

Minister of Transport, Highways and Urban Development Bimal Ratnayake, who was present at the launch of the digital fare payment system, at Kottawa, yesterday, said the new scheme was only a baby step in the right direction in a field plagued by many problems, and there were bigger tasks to be accomplished. Assessing a problem accurately is half the battle in solving it. True, what the government has undertaken by way of straightening up the public transport sector is akin to an attempt to hose down the Augean stables when the need is for the diversion of a river through them. Nevertheless, its digital payment initiative deserves appreciation and encouragement.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.