Sampath Bank and Ideal Motors partner to drive affordable vehicle ownership in Sri Lanka

Sampath Bank PLC recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Ideal Motors (Pvt) Ltd., an authorised distributor of Mahindra vehicles in Sri Lanka. The partnership aims to offer customers enhanced vehicle financing solutions and exclusive benefits that make vehicle ownership more affordable and convenient.

Through this collaboration, Sampath Bank will extend a range of financial privileges to customers purchasing Mahindra vehicles from Ideal Motors. These include a 0.5% per annum reduction in the published leasing interest rates, loans to cover vehicle insurance premiums with no interest if settled within two months, and Sampath Credit Cards with no joining fee, enabling customers to pay their insurance premiums at 0% interest for up to 12 months.

Commenting on the partnership, Deepal De Silva, Chief Operating Officer, Sampath Bank PLC, said, “This partnership represents our commitment to delivering practical financial solutions that support our customers’ lifestyle aspirations. The collaboration with Ideal Motors enables us to offer more accessible financing and flexible repayment options, empowering individuals and businesses to make confident vehicle ownership decisions. It also reflects our broader vision of being a trusted financial partner that continuously anticipates and responds to customer needs.”

Expressing her thoughts on the partnership, Ms. Nimisha Welgama, Director – Legal and Corporate Affairs, Ideal Motors (Pvt) Ltd., said, “We are pleased to collaborate with Sampath Bank to offer customers a selection of Mahindra vehicles complemented by attractive financing options, enhancing both value and the overall ownership experience.”

Positive corporate earnings driving CSE’s bull-run; ASPI hits 23,000 points

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.