NPP Govt. shows its inability to handle disaster situation properly – S.M. Marikkar

Claims Govt. fails to handle disaster situations properly due to slow and uncoordinated decision-making Says effective national leadership must have ability to take swift, practical decisions, especially during emergencies

Stresses Govt. has failed to implement any meaningful program to advance key national priorities such as economic recovery etc.

Reiterates merger between UNP and SJB will proceed despite attempts to derail process

Highlights traditional ‘Walau’ political culture has faded and princes only exist in dream worlds

Assures SJB has no desire to create crisis to come to power as it believes in democratic political struggle

Claims majority of people have now understood that NPP Govt. has incompetent leaders

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) Parliamentarian S.M. Marikkar criticised the Govt.’s management of the ongoing disaster situation, claimed that National People’s Power Govt. has revealed its inability of handling the disaster situation properly due to slow and uncoordinated decision-making.

“The Govt. is only boasting without providing proper practical solutions to the existing disaster situation in the country. The Govt.›s team has no knowledge to lead the officials in the face of the disaster situation in the country,” he said addressing a media briefing at the SJB headquarters, yesterday.

Marikkar said effective national leadership must have the ability to take swift, practical decisions, particularly during emergencies.

“The Govt. is engaged in rhetoric rather than delivering actionable solutions. If they lack expertise, they should consult those who do but even this is not happening,” he said, adding that the Govt.’s reluctance to take decisive action has further undermined its credibility.

He also charged that, despite completing one year in office, the Govt. has failed to implement any meaningful program to advance key national priorities such as economic recovery, education reform, healthcare strengthening, infrastructure development, and agricultural productivity.

“A Govt. unable to move the country in the right direction cannot expect public confidence. This Govt. is afraid to take decisions,” Marikkar stressed.

Meanwhile, he reiterated that the merger between the United National Party (UNP) and the SJB will proceed despite attempts to derail the process.

“No individual or group can obstruct the unification of this centrist and right-of-centre political force and it cannot be disrupted by conspiracies. In the forthcoming elections we will be contested together,” he affirmed adding that aside from the UNP’s ultra-liberal economic policy stance, the two parties share core policy foundations inspired by D.S. Senanayake.

“The SJB, which follows a middle-path approach grounded in Senanayake’s principles, will join hands with the UNP to shape a collective future,” he said.

Highlighting shifts in the electorate, Marikkar pointed out that 23% of voters in the next national election will be from a new, younger demographic with distinct expectations as they are from different thinking patterns.

“When the NPP Govt. inevitably weakens, the public will look for experienced, corruption-free and dynamic leadership. That is the platform that the SJB offers, supported by the competent segment of the UNP,” he said.

He added that the traditional Walau political culture has faded. “The era of elite-driven politics is over. Every citizen today stands equal. Princes exist only in dream worlds,” he remarked.

Marikkar stressed that the SJB does not seek to exploit crises for political gain and its strategy is to hold the Govt. accountable for unfulfilled promises.

“The SJB has no desire to create a crisis to come to power. We believe in a democratic political struggle. From January, the party will launch a structured program to exert stronger pressure on the Govt. to honour the commitments made to the people,” he said.

He also criticised the Govt. for widespread administrative incompetence and widening fiscal risks, which he said could push the country towards another economic setback.

“The majority of the people have now understood that this Govt. has incompetent leaders. Its inability to deliver results is clearly evident during the Parliamentary committees these days. In progress reviews of the ministries revealed that only less than 50% of their budget allocations have been utilised,” he said, claiming that it shows an alarming gap in execution in their delivering results.

He claimed that not a single rupee out of Rs. 100 million to develop the railway station in the President Anura Kumara Dissanayake’s home village, has not been spent after a year and of the 48 institutions monitored under the Infrastructure and Strategic Sectoral Monitoring Committee, 47 have reportedly failed to meet their targets.