SLT MOBITEL honoured at CMA Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2025

SLT‑MOBITEL, the National ICT Solutions Provider, reaffirmed leadership in corporate accountability and transparency, winning top honours at the CMA Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2025, organised by the Institute of Certified Management Accountants of Sri Lanka (CMA Sri Lanka), held at Cinnamon Life, Colombo, recently.

The company was feted as the Winner of Best Integrated Report – Telecommunications Sector (State) and further recognized with a Certificate of Compliance, demonstrating commitment to sustainable value creation and world‑class reporting standards.

The achievement showcases SLT‑MOBITEL’s ability to expand from traditional reporting, and deliver a comprehensive, stakeholder‑focused narrative incorporating financial performance with sustainability, governance, and social impact.

In aligning the annual reporting with global best practices, SLT‑MOBITEL has strengthened credibility, reinforced investor confidence, and established how cohesive thinking drives long‑term value.

The award also affirms SLT-MOBITEL’s success in embedding ESG principles and sustainability into every aspect of operations and dedication to building trust, and driving innovation, shaping a more transparent and sustainable future for Sri Lanka. The company aims to leverage innovation and integrated thinking to empower communities, strengthen its business, and contribute to the country’s digital future.

Now in its 11th consecutive year, the CMA Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards is a benchmark for corporate reporting excellence in Sri Lanka. The awards recognize organizations that demonstrate best practices in integrated reporting, ensuring that companies communicate a clear, holistic view of their strategy, governance, and performance.

CHEC South Asia & Southeast Asia completes emergency clearing of A5 Highway

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.