Govt. will not tolerate creating divisions among ethnic communities: Cabinet Spokesman

Stresses ICCPR Act will be used to address issues against those who disrupt ethical and religious harmony

Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa yesterday said the Government will strictly enforce the law against individuals or groups attempting to disrupt harmony or make division among ethnic or religious communities.

Speaking at the post-Cabinet meeting media briefing, Dr. Jayatissa said the Government was committed to maintaining peace and harmony across the country while ensuring national development.

“As a Government, we are implementing the law against activities that are being carried out to create discord and hostility between ethnic groups,” he stressed. “If there are intentional attempts to destroy religious harmony or national unity, the Government is ready to act under existing laws.”

He noted that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) Act had already been passed in Parliament and was being actively used to address such issues. “In November 2024, certain groups tried to create unrest in the country based on incidents that did not occur in Sri Lanka, and by circulating old video clips from abroad. We took legal action against those involved,” he said.

Dr. Jayatissa also urged media professionals to act responsibly when reporting on such matters.

“As journalists, you have a greater responsibility to protect the national unity of this country. While some groups may attempt to exploit racial or religious sentiments for short-term political gains, the media must not allow itself to be used for such purposes,” he said.

He reiterated that the Government’s mandate is to maintain stability and unity among all communities while focusing on the country’s development.

The Government yesterday assured that investigations into the 2019 Easter Sunday terror attacks are progressing effectively both in Sri Lanka and abroad, and that all those responsible would be brought to justice.

Responding to a question from a journalist on why the mastermind behind the attacks had not yet been publicly identified, despite the Public Ministry Secretary, retired Senior Deputy Inspector General of Police (DIG) Ravi Seneviratne claiming that the suspect has been identified, Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa said the ongoing investigations were moving ahead in a structured manner.

“Investigations into the Easter Sunday incident are being conducted very well. The relevant persons will be arrested in due course,” Dr. Jayatissa told reporters at the post-Cabinet meeting media briefing yesterday.

He said Seneviratne had already provided a detailed explanation to the media, while the matter was also discussed in Parliament. “No one should worry. The investigation is progressing both locally and internationally. Some people are already under investigation,” the Minister revealed.

Dr. Jayatissa reaffirmed the Government’s commitment to pursuing justice for the victims of the deadly 2019 attacks that killed over 260 people. “The investigations are not limited to Sri Lanka. Inquiries are being conducted abroad as well to ensure that every individual involved in this crime is held accountable,” he said. (SS)