Uber brings ‘business class of back seats’ to Sri Lanka with Uber Black

Uber announced the launch of Uber Black in Sri Lanka, bringing its premium ride experience to the country for the first time. Designed as the “business class of back seats,” Uber Black combines premium vehicles and highly-rated drivers for riders looking for greater comfort, quality and a more elevated travel experience.

The launch comes as demand for premium products and experiences grows across Sri Lanka, with consumers seeking greater choice and quality in their everyday experiences. Uber Black brings this choice to on-demand mobility, whether for an airport journey, an important business meeting, a special occasion or simply when riders want to travel in greater comfort.

With the introduction of Black, Uber now caters to an even broader spectrum of mobility needs in Sri Lanka - from affordable everyday rides on Uber Moto and Tuk to cars for daily travel and premium rides with Uber Black. Riders can choose the option that best suits their occasion, preference and budget, all through the same Uber app.

Uber Black will feature a wide variety of premium compact SUVs and SUVs and a curated supply of top-rated drivers. Riders can also personalise their trip before it begins - setting their preferred in-car temperature, requesting assistance with luggage, or opting for a quiet ride if they would prefer to travel without conversation.

Kaushalya Gunaratne, Country Manager - Mobility, Uber Sri Lanka said, “For more than a decade, our focus in Sri Lanka has been on making reliable mobility available to more people, across more price points. As the market evolves, our next chapter is also about giving riders more differentiated experiences for different moments in their lives. With options spanning affordable two- and three-wheelers to cars and now a premium offering with Uber Black, we can better serve the diverse mobility needs of locals and tourists alike, while supporting the country’s growing tourism economy. Uber Black is an important step in that journey and reflects our ambition to keep raising the bar for on-demand mobility in Sri Lanka.”