Groundworth launches Hokandara ISLA premium gated land development

Groundworth Group has launched ISLA, an exclusive premium land development in Hokandara, offering a thoughtfully planned gated community that combines strategic connectivity, landscaped surroundings and long-term investment potential.

Designed around the concept of creating ‘Your Island Within the City’, ISLA brings together the privacy and tranquillity of a premium residential community, with convenient access to key areas of Colombo’s expanding suburban landscape.

ISLA is positioned in a rapidly developing corridor in Hokandara, with excellent access to surrounding townships and major access routes. The development’s location in Hokandara places residents close to well-established residential and commercial areas and it offers easy access to Thalawathugoda, Pannipitiya, Kottawa and Athurugiriya.

The project is located at No. 15/10, Bastian Weragala Mawatha, Hokandara North, Hokandara.

Groundworth Group Managing Director and Co-Founder Kasun Andrahennadi stated, “Our approach to identifying land that offers more than just a location is reflected in ISLA. Our goal was to build a development in a well-connected area of Hokandara that combines thoughtful planning, appreciation potential and a quality living environment. ISLA has been designed to give our customers the opportunity to build a space that reflects their aspirations while also giving them confidence in their investment.”

Every element of ISLA’s private gated community design aims to provide a refined and secure living environment. There are only 30 premium plots in the masterplan and they range in plot sizes from six perches and above.

The property has landscaped surroundings, 30-ft-wide internal access roads and a well-constructed layout designed to create a sense of community, privacy and space.

Clear title deeds and approved plans further support the development, giving the buyers more assurance when considering the property for long-term investment or residential development. The land prices start at Rs.1.8 million per perch.

ISLA is now open for site visits, with only a limited number of plots available.