ICC Asia Pacific leaders converge in Singapore for 2nd RCG Meeting 2025

ICC Sri Lanka Chairman Shanil Fernando and Vice Chairperson Stasshani Jayawardena represent Sri Lanka

The 2nd ICC Asia Pacific Regional Consultative Group (RCG) Meeting 2025 successfully convened in Singapore, bringing together key APAC regional and international leaders from the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) and its National Committees (NCs).

The high-level, in-person gathering in Singapore focused on strategic priorities, collaborative regional efforts, and tackling pressing global trade issues.

The meeting commenced with welcome remarks by ICC Singapore Asia Pacific Regional Coordinator Kok Ping Soon. The Strategic Update was delivered by ICC Secretary General John Denton. Denton’s address covered regional priorities, engagement with APEC and ASEAN, and an update on Project Phoenix, culminating in a call to action.

A significant portion of the agenda was dedicated to NC Reports and Discussion, allowing National Committees to share their most successful and impactful work, outline key challenges, and explore areas for more effective collaboration to achieve stronger collective outcomes in the Asia Pacific region.

Representing ICC Sri Lanka were Chairman Shanil Fernando, and Vice Chairperson Stasshani Jayawardena. They presented the ICC Sri Lanka updates during the National Committee report session. Fernando actively engaged in key discussion points with the attending delegates throughout the meeting. Denton also commended the efforts borne by ICC Sri Lanka in terms of its engagement and on-going activities and setting up of the ICC Sri Lanka Arbitration and Mediation Hearing Centre.

The session “Strengthening the Network” featured updates on key ICC initiatives for APAC NC engagement, including the ICC Travel and Tourism Initiative, presented by Deputy Secretary General – Network Julian Kassum, Global Head of Network Engagement Caroline MacDonald, and ICC Thailand’s Amornrat Saelim.

The segment “Regional progress under the ICC Roadmap” discussed the ICC’s response to the escalation of trade tariffs and barriers and their impact on the APAC region. Furthermore, insights were shared on the Digitalisation of Trade and best practices.

Specialised topics such as commercialisation of intangible assets to unlock opportunities across global markets and promoting access to justice, integrity and respect for the rule of law were also presented by experts.

The meeting concluded with a final Discussion and any other business and with the closing remarks delivered by Kok Ping Soon. Attendees were also invited to an afternoon open mic session and exchange with Caroline MacDonald.

The successful RCG meeting reaffirmed the commitment of ICC’s Asia Pacific network to driving trade, advocating for rule of law, and fostering regional prosperity.