US hospital chain tests Sinque Numberless Patient Monitoring Solution

EFutures team in Sri Lanka testing Sinque, the innovative patient monitoring platform now being piloted by a US hospital chain

Sinque, a patient monitoring system that focuses on numberless behavioural analytics, to deliver obesity care that is emotionally safe, especially for GLP-1 weight loss programs, built and implemented by Sri Lankan technology outsourcing company EFutures, together with leadership from the application’s founders in the Netherlands, is now being tested by a leading hospital chain across the United States.

Sinque has only recently gained traction through its milestone testing phase, in the United States. A patient monitoring application that offers patient insights via predictive behavioural analytics, Sinque is now growing in popularity for obesity care, especially GLP-1 programs that administer medications for weight loss.

Utilising numberless monitoring systems is a key distinguishing factor of Sinque, as it takes away emotional distress out of the weightloss journey for patients. In addition to enabling healthcare professionals to administer sustainable GLP-1 weight loss programs for their patients, Sinque also aids with specialist referrals, connecting patients with further support to assist them on their weight loss journey. As the application development and technology partner for Sinque, EFutures has been delivering a solution that, while keeping patient needs at the forefront, also leverages healthcare businesses to optimise operations and reduce costs. As a result, Sinque reduces operational costs and management downtime by 25 percent and 20 percent respectively - while increasing rates of patient weight loss by 15 percent. EFutures is a global software and application engineering firm with a strong focus towards AI, data and the cloud. Headquartered in Sri Lanka, with regional offices in the US, UK, Europe and Asia Pacific, the company has long-standing experience across numerous domains, thanks to a team that is 200 plus members strong, and consists of specialists in the fields of enterprise software, cloud management, Data Engineering and AI Development.

With healthcare being a key industry of expertise for EFutures, the company, as one of the top software outsourcing companies in Sri Lanka, aims to further expand and innovate in the field. All of this, to contribute to an industry that revolves around saving lives, while reinforcing growth for healthcare establishments the world over.