Govt. briefs diplomatic community on flood relief efforts and plans for rehabilitation and reconstruction

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism, Vijitha Herath on Friday co-chaired a diplomatic briefing to update foreign Diplomatic Missions and International Organisations accredited to Sri Lanka, and Sri Lanka Missions and Honorary Consuls abroad, on national recovery and rebuilding efforts following adverse weather conditions caused by Cyclone Ditwa.

Prime Minister Dr. Amarasuriya expressed her sincere appreciation to all Diplomatic Missions, international organisations and other partners for their swift support during the emergency situation as well for the solidarity and assistance extended as the country undertakes extensive recovery efforts.

The Prime Minister noted that Sri Lanka has now transitioned from the emergency response phase into the recovery and reconstruction phase. She emphasised that the Government’s immediate priorities include the full restoration of essential services including electricity, water supply, transportation links, health facilities, and telecommunications across all affected districts, ensuring that communities can return to stability as quickly as possible.

The Prime Minister further noted that a comprehensive needs assessment is being conducted with the assistance of development partners, the results of which will guide the rehabilitation and reconstruction plans. Prime Minister Dr. Amarasuriya invited all international partners to support identified priority areas, including the repair and reconstruction of roads, bridges, and transport links; rehabilitation of canals, irrigation systems; restoration of safe water, sanitation, and hygiene services; and large-scale waste management and debris removal to reduce health and environmental risks. She reiterated the need for continued international solidarity and thanked all officials, first responders, and partners for their tireless efforts.

Disaster Management Centre Director General Major General Sampath Kotuwegoda presented an overview of the current situation in the affected areas, as well as findings from early rapid damage assessments.

The Sri Lanka Tourism Development Authority Chairman Buddhika Hewawasam together with representatives from the Sri Lanka Association of Inbound Tour Operators (SLAITO) and the Hotel Association of Sri Lanka (THASL) highlighted that key tourism sites including wildlife parks, marine parks, and cultural attractions have reopened and are accessible, and encouraged tourists to visit as overall tourism operations continue to stabilise. He further emphasised that prompt action was taken to evacuate all tourists stranded in the affected areas.

The tourism industry stakeholders emphasised that the strongest support the international community can offer Sri Lanka at this time is to continue choosing the country as a travel destination and requested the diplomatic community to encourage the regular review of travel advisories in line with improvements on-the-ground, which in turn will support the affected communities.

Representatives of the diplomatic corps and international organisations present at the meeting reaffirmed their solidarity with Sri Lanka and briefed on both ongoing initiatives and planned support measures to assist the country’s recovery and reconstruction efforts.