26-year-old man wrestles with crocodile to escape deadly attack

Colombo, Sep. 11 (Daily Mirror) - A 26-year-old man from Madagalla, Polpithigama, narrowly escaped death after being attacked by a crocodile while taking his usual evening bath at the Halmillagollawewa tank.

Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Nilanga Nilupul Ratnayaka is currently receiving treatment at the Kurunegala Teaching Hospital after sustaining serious injuries to his neck, back, and upper and lower limbs. He was due to undergo surgery yesterday.

Recounting the terrifying incident from his hospital bed, Ratnayaka said he had gone to the tank for his usual evening bath after returning from work.

“It was dusk, and I was completely alone. There wasn’t a single person in the tank or nearby. I parked my motorcycle on the tank bund, had my bath and came up to the bund to get dressed,” he said.

He said he then remembered that he had left his bar of soap near the water and returned to retrieve it.

“As I went down the steps towards the water, I suddenly felt something bite my foot. I fell into the water and realized that it was a crocodile,” he said.

Ratnayaka said he managed to grab hold of the steps and struggled to free his foot from the crocodile's grip.

“Then it caught me by the shoulder. I gathered all the courage I had and put my hand inside the crocodile’s mouth. Somehow, I managed to free myself from its grip,” he said.

“Although the crocodile had bitten off a piece of flesh from my back, I still had enough strength to ride my motorcycle home. I was admitted to the Polpithigama Base Hospital and later transferred to the Kurunegala Teaching Hospital,” he said.

Residents said a crocodile believed to be about 13 feet long has frequently been seen near the tank bund and has also entered nearby home gardens, where it has preyed on dogs and other animals.

They urged wildlife authorities to take immediate action to capture the crocodile and relocate it to a suitable forest reserve to prevent further attacks on people and animals in the area.