School dropouts

Prime Minister and Education Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya has informed Parliament that as many as 267,138 students dropped out of school between 2018 and 2024. She said so in answer to a question from Opposition MP Hesha Withanage. Pointing out that figures for the period from 2018 to 2024 had been derived from annual school census reports, using an internationally recognised methodology that takes into account student enrolment figures and dropout rates from Grade One to Grade Ten, the PM added that definitive data on school dropout were not available for the period between 2010 and 2017. This is something serious. The education authorities must have such data. Otherwise, how can they formulate policies aimed at improving student participation in school education?

The Prime Minister told Parliament that the school dropout statistics were subject to the caveat that not all students who had left schools could be considered dropouts; some of them may have moved to schools in other areas, enrolled in international schools, or migrated overseas with their families while continuing their studies.

Such cases could not be separately identified under the methodology used to compile the statistics and were, therefore, included in the overall dropout figures. This points to the need for a holistic statistical analysis of the issue of students leaving school, and steps must be taken to ensure that all relevant factors are taken into account when statistics are prepared. The education authorities should be able to say how many children actually discontinued their education.

Thankfully, UNESCO has pointed out that Sri Lanka continues to perform better than most South Asian countries in keeping children in school though thousands still leave the education system annually. Using available data for 2024, some researchers have argued that Sri Lanka’s school dropout rate is about 0.7 per cent of the government-school student population. Regional comparisons show Nepal and Sri Lanka among the stronger performers on school retention, while Bangladesh has made substantial progress and Pakistan continues to struggle with high dropout rates. India, too, has worked hard to bring down the national school dropout rate. However, the bar must be set higher, and action should be taken to prevent school dropouts completely. It is hoped that the Prime Minister, as an academic and researcher, will address this issue, and ensure that the education authorities will fulfil the need for high-quality, policy-relevant statistics.

Prime Minister Dr. Amarasuriya has said a range of factors have contributed to students leaving the formal education system. According to media reports quoting her answer in Parliament, they include personal circumstances, school-related issues, family and economic difficulties, social influence, as well as students opting for alternative educational pathways and training opportunities. Researchers inform us that mong the main causes of school dropout in Sri Lanka are poverty, poor academic achievement, lack of perceived relevance of education, family difficulties, child labour, even early marriage or pregnancy in some cases, and inequalities in educational opportunities. From a policy perspective, as researchers have pointed out, addressing these issues requires not only financial support for vulnerable families but also improvements in school quality, vocational pathways, counselling services and community support systems.

The need for a multi-pronged strategy to address the root causes of the school dropout issue cannot be overemphasised. This should figure high on the incumbent government’s agenda.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.