Thoughts about “People and Events”

The start of the People and Events column in the Sunday Island was incidental, informal and fortuitous. At a Kandy Girls’ High School OGA dinner dance in the late 1990s I was at the same table with Gamini Weerakoon, then editor of the Island/Sunday Island and his wife Rajitha, a past pupil of KHS. Gamini and I were non-dancers so over drinks, and in spite of the loud music, we chatted. Suddenly Gamini said: “Why don’t you write a weekly column in The Island?” Being modest, I asked him whether he was sure but then consented readily. He asked me what title I would give the column, I promptly replied: “People and Events.” Later on, I realized how judicious I had been in my spontaneous choice. This title gave me a wide spectrum within which to write.

I selected the first three letters of my first name as my pseudonym for the column. Writing pseudonymously was not a tactic to hide, but it was because I was initially shy and a little hesitant. Later of course, when I commented adversely on political situations in the country at certain periods of time, it was a useful cover, or so I presumed.

I found Gamini easy going as an editor and it was not taxing to write for him. He was undemanding and published every column I sent. Manik de Silva succeeded Gamini as the editor of the Sunday Island in 1997 and I sat up straighter. The first article he received from me was my tribute to Bhikkhuni Ayya Khema, which he said was very well written. He always appreciated the human-interest articles I wrote. A few years later he also told me in his usual polite manner: “your forte is not political matters.” I accepted his subtle admonition and tried to refrain from commenting on how things were in the country on account of politicians. I am very grateful to Manik for his support of me over the years. From being my editor he has gone on to become a sincere friend.

I have been writing People and Events for over 30 years now and over this period of time I believe I have written well over 1,000 columns. Initially I would type my article and give the pages for someone to deliver. After I got a computer, the process became more streamlined and I would e-mail the finished article to Manik. Even when I traveled overseas for long or short stays, I kept my column going. My second son would take me to his office after hours and I would work on it there and send it from the US. Wednesdays were always a focal point for me, as I would aim to have my column completed by then.

There is a personal element to what I write; I comment, opine and judge. Often I have selected the topic for my article based on some connection, like visiting a place or reading about something and having my interest aroused. I do have a slant towards women in any sphere of activity or life. I have written about people, many consequent to actually interviewing them. Attending book launches and award ceremonies have been grist to my writing wrist. So also books I have read, Sinhala films and theatre productions I have seen, which I have then reviewed.

Interviewing people for this column meant that I got to talk to people that I wouldn’t have dreamed of meeting. Among the most memorable are:

= Jayanthi Kuru-Utumpala – the first Sri Lankan to summit Mount Everest;

= Barbara Sansoni – artist and designer whose unique approach to colour was eye-opening;

= Actor Gagan Malik who played the role of Siddartha Gautama in the film produced by Navin Gooneratne.

In 2008 I received the W.A. Siriwardena award for Columnist of the Year writing in English from the Sri Lanka Press Institute. My memory of the awards ceremony at the Mount Lavinia Hotel was that I unwisely drank two glasses of wine to quench my thirst, and was quite shaky walking down the steps and had to hand my trophy to my older son to carry for me!

During the Covid-19 lockdowns in 2020, I decided to go through the articles I written and select what I felt were timeless for publication. In the end I narrowed it down to 45 articles and published a book titled “People, Events, Places” in 2022.

I get pleasure from writing and I am a fast writer. It is also a sort of meditation for me since I am completely within my thinking, creating mind when I write. However, after my recent illness I stopped writing and I very much miss being able to sit in front of my computer and type up an article – this was one of my greatest pleasures. It has become an entirely different process now to dictate my column and then review it and make changes.

I am pleased when people telephone or e-mail me to say they approved of my article of the week, or better when they say they enjoyed reading it. Alternatively, I am not at all perturbed when criticized, which happens occasionally. Criticism is what I value more than praise since I know there is improvement possible.

Writing this column has brought me much fulfillment and joy. It gave me a sense of purpose. My readers are usually non-critical, and appreciative of what I write, inquiring after me when a column fails to appear in the paper. Certain readers, even from overseas, have reached out to me to comment on a column and we have become friends as a result. I am so very grateful to all of you for reading “People and Events” over all these years!

Smoke Free Sweden calls out to WHO not to suggest nicotine alternatives

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.