Japan extends support for humanitarian demining activities in northern and eastern provinces

Ambassador of Japan to Sri Lanka Akio ISOMATA on Wednesday signed a grant contract for a demining project under the scheme of “Grant Assistance for Grassroots Human Security Projects (GGP)”, with Mines Advisory Group (MAG) Head of Support Services Kevin Klerx, Hazardous Area Life-support Organisation (The HALO Trust) Program Manager Hannah Picton and Delvon Assistance for Social Harmony (DASH) Director/Program Manager Ananda Chandrasiri.

The Government of Japan has provided $ 1,343,202 (approx. Rs. 400million) for these projects, which will be implemented by MAG, The HALO Trust and DASH, to support their humanitarian demining activities in the Northern and Eastern Provinces of Sri Lanka.

Under this new project, almost 400,000 m2 of land is expected to be made mine-free, allowing more than 3,100 people to return to their land and approx. 22,000 people in the surrounding areas to expand their economic activities.  Japan has been a major donor to demining activities in Sri Lanka since 2002, and the total assistance amounts to over $ 49 million.

Expressing his deepest gratitude to the three NGOs for their untiring efforts in the demining activities, Ambassador ISOMATA said: “Today’s signing of three (3) grant contracts is another testament to Japan’s commitment to continued assistance to the people of Sri Lanka, especially to those in the conflict-affected areas. At the same time, we also have to strengthen assistance to the affected communities for the enhancement of livelihoods and improvement of necessary infrastructure, in order to help the people of the communities to move on to the next stage of socio-economic development in the North and East in a seamless manner. I hope Japan’s continued assistance to the demining efforts of Sri Lanka will further strengthen the strong bond of trust and friendship that exists between Japan and Sri Lanka.”

Kevin Klerx said: “For nearly 23 years, MAG has helped reduce the threat of landmines and ERW in Sri Lanka, with longstanding support from the government of Japan. This assistance has enabled MAG to release over 3.9 million square meters of land and destroy thousands of explosive items.”

Hannah Picton said: “The HALO Trust is delighted with the continued and generous support from the Government of Japan. HALO has cleared 303,000 landmines and released 121 square kilometres of contaminated land. Supporting over 185,000 displaced people to resettle in the Northern Province, enabling communities to rebuild and restore sustainable livelihoods.”

Ananda Chandrasiri said: “DASH has cleared 8.1 km² of land, destroyed thousands of mines and explosive remnants, and benefited nearly 195,000 people directly and indirectly. This project will clear over 110,000 square meters, improving safety, livelihoods, and access to infrastructure, and enabling resettlement.”