Vesak Commemorated At The American University In Washington DC Amid Global Peace Walk In Sri Lanka

The prestigious American University in Washington DC was at the centre of vibrant Vesak Day Commemorations on 23rd April organized under the auspices of the Key Spiritual Study Centre, and presided by Most Venerable Katugastota Uparatana Thero, Chief Judicial Sanganayake of America and Chief Abbot of the Maryland Buddhist Viharaya. The atmosphere within the centre resembled one of sacred, serene and heavenly nature, typical of a Buddhist Temple’s spiritual setting, amidst a congregation of monks, and a large gathering of the university’s diverse community of students and well-wishers. The event also coincided with the Global Peace Walk in Sri Lanka, spearheaded by Bhante Pannakara Thero of the United States, accompanied by a group of monks and Aloka the Peace Dog, which was of added significance.

Vesak Day at the American University marked yet another significant milestone for the university, which was one-of-a- kind in itself to be hosted by the Kay Spiritual Study Centre in its 60 years of existence since 1965. The centre itself is a state-of-the-art faith-based institution of spiritual excellence promoting interfaith dialogue, religious harmony and discourses among students of diverse faiths, beliefs and interests. Ven Uparatana Thero serves at the centre as a spiritual guru and mentor representing the Buddhist faith of interests for over 37 years.

The Buddhist religious observances commenced with the lighting of the ceremonial oil lamp by members of the congregation, students and well-wishers alike, symbolizing the spirits of wisdom  – dispelling the darkness of ignorance. Bhante Uparatana thero delivered a brief sermon, highlighting the significance of Vesak or the Thrice Blessed Day for the Buddhists, in commemorating and celebrating the 3 pivotal events in the life of Buddha, namely the Birth, the Enlightenment and the Passing Away. Venerable Thero also emphasized the importance of Vesak Day for the spiritual emancipation and mindfulness of the people of faith, embracing the Buddha’s message of peace, compassion and loving kindness with one another with empathy and conviction. As part of the proceedings, members in the audience joined the monks in practising meditation, reading dhamma scriptures and chanting sutras as a tribute to Three Jewels. Venerable monks also recited stanzas from the Dhammapada and invoked blessings on all sentient beings for their well-being and salvation. In closing, those who joined the Vesak Day partook in light refreshments in keeping with the spirits and long standing traditions in observance of Vesak.

In fact, Vesak Day commemorations couldn’t have come at a better time when humanity is at odds with unimaginable crises, chaos and uncertainty looming large across multiple fronts throughout the world.

On invitation, Mr Sarath Dissanayake, a Sri Lankan community member shared insights on the significance of Vesak Day and what it means to millions of Buddhists, well-wishers and the like-minded from around the world.

It’s a great privilege and honor for me to grace this spiritual gathering in celebration of Vesak. At the outset allow me to convey my gratitude to Bhante Katugastota Uparatana Thero for the opportunity. I’m sure Bhante needs no introduction since you all know him well. I’m here to share some insights on the significance of Vesak and what it means to people of faith, well-wishers and the like-minded.

As you all would probably know, Vesak is the most sacred day, and a day of profound spiritual significance for millions of Buddhists around the world. Vesak is also known as the Thrice Blessed Day. Indeed, Vesak honors and celebrates 3 pivotal events in the life of Buddha, namely, Buddha’s Birth, his Enlightenment and his Passing, or Parinibbana, all of which had happened on a Day of Vesak. Vesak typically falls on the full moon day in the month of May and this year too is no exception and is celebrated on 31st May, which is roughly in 5 weeks.

Let me briefly touch upon a few illustrations for the sake of clarity. The word Vesak is derived from the Pali term, Vishakha or the Sanskrit term Vaishakha for the lunar month of May. Paradoxically, you may wonder why Buddhists celebrate Buddha’s passing, rather than mourning.  Because, it is not about the loss of his physical body or a tragic end itself, rather an ultimate liberation from the cycle of rebirth and suffering, reaching sublime status or Nirvana. Nirvana literally is not a destination, but a state of consciousness, often called supreme bliss.

Speaking of Buddha, he was born a Prince in Lumbini in what is now called Nepal in the 5th century BC. At the age of 29, he renounced a life of privilege and sought liberation for human suffering. At the age of 35 he attained Enlightenment in Bodhgaya and propagated his timeless teachings for nearly 45 years before his passing at the age of 80. The word Buddha, in Mahayana tradition, means an intellect with a higher mind and wisdom. In Theravada tradition, Buddha, is  “The Awakened One“ or “The Enlightened One“ and refers to someone who has transcended ignorance, greed, and hatred, (commonly called 3 evils or 3 Unwholesome Roots) to realize the true nature of existence or life.

Buddha’s teachings on enlightenment, mindfulness and path to ending suffering, became the basis of Dhamma, which is nothing but a way of life. Buddha himself exhorted that living in the present moment or mindfulness to be the key to realize the true potential of human mindset and wisdom. Buddha said that our thoughts, speech and deeds are what and who we are, and would be a tacit reflection of one’s mind. He spoke of the 3 evils of greed, anger and illusion, as the root cause for the existence of life and its continuation, leading to the vicious and endless cycle of karmic samsara and suffering. It was emphasized that there is no permanent self, emphasizing impermanence, mindfulness, and the purification of the mind to break the cycle of rebirth and suffering, for which Buddha advocated the Four Noble Truths and Noble Eightfold Path to attain Nirvana. The message of the Buddha is timeless, universal, profound, and remains unmatched and unchallenged ever since it was first enunciated over 2600 years ago. The teaching of the Buddha is open to all to see and judge for themselves. It appeals to reason and freedom of thought, recognizing the dignity and potentiality of the human mind, exhorting its followers to avoid evil, to do good and to purify their minds. Buddha’s teachings have inspired millions of followers and continue to inspire people of faith even after 2600 years since his passing.

Buddha spoke of three jewels or three refuges, worthy of respect and veneration by Buddhists. Vesak is an appropriate occasion to reflect upon these 3 Jewels or 3 Refuges in Buddhism: the Buddha (The Enlightened One), Dhamma (his Timeless Teachings), and Sangha (his Disciples). When we celebrate the birth of the Buddha we celebrate the first refuge: the Buddha himself as a teacher and role model for our individual spiritual paths. Celebrating the Buddha’s enlightenment enables us to learn from and reflect on the second refuge, Dharma, or the Buddha’s teachings that resulted from his awakening. When we commemorate the passing of the Buddha, we reflect on the third refuge, how the Buddha passed on the responsibility of teaching the Dharma to the Sangha, or the monastic community. When we “seek refuge” we are re-orienting our lives towards the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. Stating our commitment to the Three Refuges, also called the Three Jewels, is accepted by all Buddhists as the gateway to a life of Dhamma. They are “noble” because the Noble One–the Buddha–taught this to the world for over 45 years. They are also “noble” because they ennoble those who realize them. Thus, the Dhamma only becomes a refuge for us when we turn it from teachings and theories into realization and reality. With this, your journey of liberation starts, and relying on the Three Jewels begins.

In essence, Vesak is more than just a religious celebration; it is a tribute to the life of Siddhartha Gautama. The thrice blessed day offers an opportune moment for reflection on the timeless wisdom of Buddha and his universal teachings and what it means to be Buddhist. It is also a time for contemplation, a day to pause and ponder, and realign ourselves with the profound teachings of the Buddha. Vesak Day is an occasion to awaken, to break through the repetitive cycles of thoughts, desires and attachments that keep us in an endless cycle of suffering. Vesak is a time to realize the true purpose of one’s own life, and help others with compassion and care. To do all this, the key is to have a firm conviction and commitment to discover more of oneself, and the world, and to have an open mind to gain wisdom from Buddhist doctrine of teachings. If you could master and embrace even a pinch of these moral ethics and spiritual attributes, then you are on the right path and have a reason to rejoice and celebrate Vesak. Afterall, we are the creators of our own destiny as Buddha preached.

An important dimension of the Vesak festival is making merit and doing good deeds to achieve virtues of wisdom or that of one’s relatives. Pious Buddhists often spend the day at temples observing the 8 Precepts and meditation in devotion to Buddha. The Buddhists will partake in spiritual practices, religious discourses, acts of charity, meritorious deeds, and spiritual offerings to invoke blessings on loved ones and ancestors by transferring merits. Spiritual decoration, illuminations and lighting of lanterns symbolize the light of wisdom dispelling the darkness of ignorance. In today’s modern era, Vesak Day also serves as a call for collective awareness of the importance of living harmoniously and respecting diversity, as well as promoting non-violence, cultivating inner peace, and performing virtuous deeds. Of course, the spirits of Buddhist teachings continue to inspire Buddhist followers to live a life guided by wisdom, compassion, and spiritual awakening, for their salvation or liberation.

Buddha’s timeless teachings of compassion, tolerance and selfless service resonate deeply with the values of the United Nations. The General Assembly, by its resolution 54/115, of 1999, recognized internationally the Day of Vesak to acknowledge the significant contribution Buddhism has made for over two and a half millennia and continues to make to the spirituality of humanity. This day is commemorated annually at the UN Headquarters and other UN offices around the world.

Dear friends, it would be amiss if I didn’t say a few words on Bhante Pannakara Thero who has become a spiritual icon for millions of Buddhists all over the world. When we celebrate Vesak at the Kay Spiritual Learning Centre in Washington DC today, there’s a historic event happening in Sri Lanka right now which is unparalleled in the annals of Buddha’s 2600-year-long spiritual awakening. ‎ Coincidentally, Bhante Pannakara who led the historic walk for peace epic journey from Texas to Washington DC not long ago, is currently visiting Sri Lanka on yet another spiritual adventure. Bhante Pannakara is accompanied by a delegation of monks and Aloka. In fact, the monks embarked on a peace walk in Sri Lanka on 22nd April from the historic city of Anuradhapura which will culminate with an unprecedented ceremony in Colombo on 28th where a casket of Buddha Relics together with a Sapling of Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Tree (Ficus Religiosa) will be officially presented to Bhante Pannakara by none other than the Sri Lankan President himself. Thereafter, the Sacred Relics and Bo Sapling will be flown into Texas accompanied by Bhante Pannakara himself, in time for the Vesak Celebrations at his Monastery in Fort-Worth Texas in May. As you would probably know, these Sacred Buddha’s relics have been extracted from the ashes of the Buddha’s cremated body in India around 2600 years ago. The lineage of the Bo tree Sapling could be traced back to the sacred Bo Tree at Bodhgaya in India, under which the Buddha attained Enlightenment 2600 years ago, which itself is a historic feat.

Guess what. The Buddhist followers, well-wishers and the like-minded in America would be able to see for themselves, the most important jewel of Buddha himself when the sacred relics will be on a public exposition in Texas to coincide with the Vesak celebrations in May. Certainly, people in the US are extremely fortunate and immensely blessed to see and worship Buddha’s sacred relics on their own soil, which is the first of its kind here in America. Afterall, Buddha sacred relics indeed are as sacred, spiritual and worthy of seeing and respect as Buddha himself in person.

All religious leaders, regardless of their faiths and beliefs, have advocated what it takes for people to be good and role models in a society. In today’s world plagued with conflicts, uncertainty and suffering, the message of Vesak is more relevant than ever, and one that transcends all human barriers of hatred, anger, cruelty, ill-will and all forms of verbal, physical and psychological abuses and acts against humanity.  Let us therefore use this day to renew our commitment to empathy. Let us be inspired by the sacred teachings of the Buddha and work together for the greater good of humanity and the world at large. May the Vesak bring peace to your hearts, happiness to your lives, and to all those near and far. Sabbe Satta Bhavantu Sukhitatta – May all beings be well, happy, peaceful and free of suffering.

“Peace comes from within.  Do not seek it without.” – Siddhārtha Gautama

*Sarath Dissanayake is a retired Ambassador and Foreign Ministry Spokesman. He can be reached at schandrad@hotmail.com