Full Moon a sign of cultural link between China and Sri Lanka - Ambassador

Colombo, Sep. 29 (Daily Mirror) - Chinese Ambassador Wei Huaziang said the full moon day was significant to Sri Lanka and China in terms of culture and it closely links the hearts of Sri Lankans and Chinese building bridges for cultural exchange between the two countries.

“Sri Lanka has a long history and a splendid civilization, and Poya Day is also of great importance to people’s lives. An ancient Chinese poem reads; the bright moon rises over the sea; we share this moment though far apart’. The same bright moon carries the Sri Lankan people’s hope for a peaceful harmonious life and the Chinese people’s yearning for happiness and reunion. It is this moon that closely links the hearts of our two people’s and builds bright bridges for our cultural exchanges,” Mr. Huaziang said at the celebration of the Chinese Mid-Autumn Festival held in Colombo.

“Today’s stage is a vivid epitome of China-Sri Lanka exchanges. Artists from Zhejiang . China, have brought not only the poetry of the Jiangnan water towns and the elegance of Chinese cultural heritage , but also , in programs such as ‘Harmony of the Maritime Silk Road’ a resonant blend of classic melodies from China and Sri Lanka . These Melodies spanning mountains and seas, showcase the balance of strength and tenderness in Eastern aesthetics, convey the good wishes for reunion at the Mid-Autumn Festival , and use art to play a contemporary movement of people to people connectivity and shared beauty between China and Sri Lanka,” he added.

“Artistic dialogue between nations will transcend geographical and linguistic boundaries, understand each other's history, traditions and emotions and deepen mutual respect between nations,” he also said.

Secretary to Prime Minister Pradeep Saputhantri said the festival will help people of both countries to learn and respect the cultures of each other and build up a closer bond . He said it is such bonds which build unity.

Vice Chancellor University of Colombo Prof. Indika Mahesh Karunatilaka recalled the long relationship which Chinese and Sri Lankan academics have maintained over the years.

A media release issued on the Festival said it will further deepen cultural exchanges and mutual learning between China and Sri Lanka, the China Cultural Centre in Sri Lanka, the Department of Culture, Radio, Television and Tourism of Zhejiang Province. The Overseas Chinese Association in Sri Lanka jointly hosted the "Mid-Autumn Festival Cultural Performance series under the guidance of the Embassy of the People's Republic of China in Sri Lanka. A delegation of 32 renowned artists from the Zhejiang Performing Arts Group (including the Zhejiang Song and Dance Theatre) participated in the event: