Browns’ General Trading honours outstanding dealer excellence

Browns General Trading recently recognised the exceptional efforts of its valued dealer network in the Colombo region in promoting its portfolio of leading global brands; Makita, Eclipse, Tailin, JK, Firman, Juba and Lion. The event saw a gathering of over 150 dealers, serving as a platform to honour excellence in performance, fortify connections and reaffirm Browns’ long-term commitment to fostering its dealer ecosystem.

The evening featured prestigious awards and gifts that were presented to key performers across several categories, acknowledging their dedication and valued contribution to Browns’ General Trading’s growth, while serving as an inspirational night for all.

Speaking on the event, Ruwan Kodisinghe, Head of Operations – Browns General Trading said, “Our dealer sales staff are the backbone of GTD’s success. Their commitment, energy, and passion for our brands continue to elevate our performance and strengthen our presence across the market. This convention is our way of honouring their contribution and reaffirming our promise to support them with the right tools, training, and opportunities. Together, we look forward to achieving even greater milestones in the coming year.”

In the last year, Browns’ General Trading has expanded its dealer footprint considerably, enhanced its brand visibility and introduced innovative new product lines as part of its marketing strategy while focusing on sustainable dealer development. The dealer emphasises Browns’ promise to invest in its most valuable stakeholders, its dealers, strengthen connections and reinforce the values of the company’s 150-year legacy.

Established in 1875, Browns has flourished over the years to grow into a household name with a reputation as strong as its years are long. Today, the prestigious Browns Group is one of Sri Lanka’s largest diversified conglomerates, which manages a fast growing and valuable portfolio of brands across several key industry sectors, such as automotive, power generation, agriculture and plantation, pharmaceuticals, investments, marine and manufacturing as well as leisure.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.