Ceylon Literary Arts Festival:Reflections of a participant

Mihiri Jansz reflects on her experiences at the recently concluded Ceylon Literary and Arts Festival

I was able to attend Day 2 of the Ceylon Literary and Arts Festival thanks to a complimentary day pass I received from a project I’m involved with at my institution. Overall, I found it a very interesting experience. I am sharing my personal views here, while also trying to grapple with the questions, “why a literary festival? Who is it actually for?”.

I must say up front that I’m a social person. I love meeting new people and have no issues with crowds. I remember absolutely enjoying attending GLF a couple of times, but I think it was also exciting to attend something like that with my friends and we created some very fun memories! GLF is certainly a very different experience because it was on a much larger scale. But unlike GLF, CLAF gave a day pass holder complete access.

There were two major high points for me. Firstly the session with Julia Quinn in conversation with Ashok Ferry and secondly the writing workshop by Katherine May. I’ve long been an avid romance reader, including regency romances, but surprisingly I hadn’t read Ms. Quinn’s work.

My daughter is actually a big fan. But I have binge watched Bridgerton, so I had some passing knowledge of her work. Julia Quinn was honestly a delight, she was eloquent, authentic and most of all grounded. In fact, something she shared made me buy one of the series and I’m right in the middle of it.

This particular book deals with losing a spouse and moving on and so far I see her dealing with it with a lot of sensitivity. Grief and living with grief is definitely a theme I gravitate to (for those of you who don’t know me, I lost my spouse nearly five years ago). Isn’t this what reading novels is all about, connecting with fictional characters and dealing with yours and their journeys?

The writing workshop by Katherine May was about structuring personal writing like memoirs. I was unaware that it had been slotted as for 18-29 year olds and very happily had booked a free pass for it. It was a brilliant session because Katherine had a wonderful ability to give very supportive and illuminating feedback.

I really felt there was so much promise in that small conference room, so many brilliant ideas shared. I felt mine were quite dull to be honest, but it gives me hope for the potential for writing in Sri Lanka.

I really enjoyed all the sessions I attended, but that’s also me. I have no idea how others would have responded and I’d actually love to know.

A particular note on Karissa Chen’s session where she gave such insight into her writing process and the motivations for her book Homeseeker. I wanted to buy a copy but it was bit too steep for me, and I also remembered the books unread on my bedside table! My budget mocked me again when I wanted to buy the book on Indian cooking. Every session was food for thought and for budding writers an opportunity to explore their craft. For me, I think it made me reconsider my secret desire to become a writer.

But what about the question, “Why a literary festival?” Honestly, it felt a bit like a rock concert for writers. I think though that if you are privileged enough to attend, and you have enough curiosity as well as linguistic and cultural capital, it’s an opportunity to think about things in different ways, see different world views and to experience ‘the other’ perhaps?

Did it feel elitist? Yes, a tad, but pleasantly not as bad as I expected. A bit of an event for the expatriate community too — in some ways felt a like a recolonized space. I’m being tentative because these are just feelings and not necessarily fact. Was this an accessible space for those across socio-economic classes? I don’t think so, though one must also note the free student passes. Volunteering also seemed to be a way in as well.

A friend asked me if this was a democratic space. It made me think, can such a space saturated in ‘English’ be democratic? English is so complicated in Sri Lanka, with all its privilege markers and access, while also being alien too. Even after 200 years, how Sri Lankan is English anyway?

On a very different note, I should also say that the staff at the hotel were very nice. I don’t think it was easy to deal with the influx of people, but I found them to be very pleasant, polite and helpful at every turn. I really had my reservations about a literary festival at a hotel but honestly, the space worked, for the most part.

I think it was also a very packed schedule with very little time to manoeuvre. But this might actually have been a good thing too. I had responsibilities that didn’t make it possible to really engage at times; my father had taken ill that day and I was distracted checking on him. I was sadly unable to really visit the art exhibition.

Finally, why literary festivals? It’s ultimately all about cultural capital isn’t it? And the answers to “who is it for?” can be multiple – I’ll leave you to ponder on that!

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.