MR’s Second Term (2009-2015) and tension between Mahinda and Sarath Fonseka

By the end of his first term as President MR was riding high. He was rightly credited with ensuring a comprehensive victory over the LTTE and its terrorist network which his predecessors thought was an impossible task. MR and his brother Gotabaya had ensured the smooth working of our armed forces which were earlier manned mostly by “spit and polish” leaders who followed the tactics they had learnt in Sandhurst. They were outwitted by the home grown “officers” of the LTTE who knew their fighting terrain like the back of their hands.

LTTE officers fought side by side their barefoot soldiers while our “arm chair generals” were famous for their boasts in the safety of the mess hall. Many were the times when camp commanders were holidaying in Colombo when LTTE fighters attacked their strategically located camps. Their losses and retreats not only demoralized our foot soldiers but also emboldened the LTTE to openly express their contempt for our military leadership.

I was present when some of our generals argued with successive Presidents that this war could not be won and a negotiated settlement was imperative. Some Presidents lived in fear that the army instead of fighting the LTTE would attempt to grab power and end their rule. They were suspicious of strong leaders and preferred to install weaklings who were either relatives or family friends. We shall describe how later even MR eventually fell a victim to that paranoia with tragic consequences both for himself and the country.

The turning point of the war came with the appointment of Sarath Fonseka as the Army Commander. He came from the Sinha regiment in which my brother Asoka was a Major-General. At my brothers urging I spoke up for Sarath with CBK to no avail. Fortunately when GR became the Defence Secretary he was able to convince his brother to appoint SF who was on the verge of retirement as the army chief. From then on till the end of the var the “troika” of MR, GR and SF conducted the war from the top with mutual understanding.

The tendency of the Rajapaksa brothers to freely delegate decision making to others in the hierarchy was used well in this instance to remove the cobwebs from our old orders of battle. I have referred earlier to the change in tactics from putting large numbers of battalions on a broad front to small units of eight which could penetrate the LTTE and hit and run back to their regiment. This change was quite successful and the morale of the frontline soldiers improved.

They were also aware that there would be no mercy from their chief if the assault was unsuccessful. As the soldier’s grapevine observed “There was Johnny [land mines] in front and Fonny (the Army Chief) behind”. There was no possibility of shirking. SF, with GR’s support, built up a cadre of new commanders who, though they did not come from “posh” schools and social backgrounds were dedicated and patriotic fighters. Among them were Jagath Dias, Chagi Gallage, Shavendra Silva, Kamal Gunaratne, Nanda Mallawaartchi, Daya Ratnayake, Chandrasiri, Ravipriya, and several others who led from the front and were constantly monitored by SF. A strong fighting machine was created by him.

We referred earlier to MR’st impeccable strategy in countering the various groups who were hell bent on exfiltrating Prabhakaran and the top leadership from the Pudumathalan quadrant. They all had their own agendas and were frustrated when they could not change the stance of the MR government that nothing short of a total surrender could be contemplated. Many of the interlocutors, including the UN’s Satish Nambiar, proposed that the LTTE leaders could either be airlifted to a waiting warship or be asked to come out with a white flag denoting surrender.

It was this suggestion that led to a later talk about a white flag of a group of LTTE middle rankers who were killed while attempting to flee. The senior LTTE leaders like Prabhakaran, Pottu Amman and Soosai did not want to surrender notwithstanding the assurances of their supporters. They attempted to break free from the military cordon and reach the power boats that had been made ready to take them out to sea and safety. However they were cut down by the soldiers of the Gajaba regiment under Shavendra Silva. Karuna Amman was flown to Mullaitivu to identify the corpse of Prabhakaran who was cremated in a secret place to prevent later commemorations and glorification.

The end of Prabhakaran and the top leadership of the LTTE was celebrated throughout the south. The MR-GR-SF combination that had delivered a victory that many had thought impossible became instant national heroes as were the other heads of the armed services. Politicians of the PA also basked in this glory while the JVP and Hela Urumaya stated that they had been right all along when they pressed MR to continue fighting and not enter into negotiations with the LTTE.

In Parliament many of the Tamil MPs who were constantly subjected to death threats from the LTTE confided in us that they were now relieved that they could continue with their democratic politics. Till then their lives hung on a thread. All their senior leaders, save Sampanthan, had been brutally assassinated by the LTTE.

In the final days of the war MR was advised to leave the country so that he would not be pressurized to intervene. There was intensive campaigning, particularly by the Ambassadors of western nations, to halt the offensive in Mullaitivu. Western media also backed these initiatives and ran horror stories from the “quadrant” about intensive bombing. We now know that the LTTE media managers contacted Marie Colvin, the well known UK war correspondent, to write about their complaints in the western press. She had been cultivated by the LTTE when she spent time in the North reporting on the war. Later she was killed in the Middle East when her shelter was bombed by western aircraft.

As soon as the war was over MR who had been in Jordan returned to a hero’s welcome at Katunayake. Always a showman he came down the airline steps and fell on the ground to “kiss the motherland” in full view of the TV cameras. A seven tiered cake was cut by him, GR and the service chiefs at Temple Trees to celebrate the victory. MR graciously asked SF to be the first to cut the cake. But unknown to their countrymen who were celebrating with national flag waving and cooking “kiribath”, trouble was brewing among the leading “dramatis personae”.

Poor GR was caught in the middle of an incoming fiasco. As usual GR could not act in a situation in which big brother called the shots, be it right or wrong. The Rajapaksa family was beginning to interfere in public decision making and the post war scenario began to take an unanticipated turn. The massive support extended by the people to MR was being misinterpreted as a family victory by interested parties who were now taking centre stage with gay abandon.

While MR provided political cover and dutifully followed the recommendations of the Security Chiefs during the war, in peacetime he became wary of the popularity of the army and its commander Sarath Fonseka. At first he tried to woo military chiefs in a manner that he had perfected for local politicians. All the armed forces chiefs were given perks like blocks of land in Colombo and bank loans to build their houses. MR and his wife Shiranthi befriended and hosted the wives of the service commanders.

Once when we were on an official visit to China Mahinda brought along his wife and all the wives of the military top brass on government account. We all had a memorable visit to the old forbidden city in Beijing. The Chinese government spared no effort to please this delegation. On one occasion when the ladies complained that they did not have enough time for shopping in an upmarket shop well known for pearls, Chinese officials kept it open late in to the night.

But this public relations campaign of the Rajapaksas did not succeed because SF was now determined to create a new army in his image. As a first sign of this transformation he wanted to stage a grand victory parade where the fighting units would be brought down to Colombo to be honoured by the nation. Such parades have been held in other countries. For instance after the end of the Second World War a massive parade of the victorious allies was held in bombed out Berlin, mostly to intimidate the remaining supporters of the Third Reich.

At the same time SF wanted to increase the numbers of soldiers in the army on the grounds that we had to be prepared to counter Indian military interventions. Naturally this sent shivers down MR’s spine. If over 40 years of political infighting had taught MR anything it was “uneasy lies the head that wears the crown”. Like Shakespeare’s Richard the Third he had ruthlessly fought his way to the top of the political heap. All his well honed political instincts told him that SF would eventually challenge him and that his blandishments and gift giving would not succeed.

It was aggravated by the gossiping and tale carrying among our political classes. Once I was surprised to see a middle level army officer in uniform hanging around MR. When I inquired about him I was told that he was a close relative. Such breach of protocol must have irked SF who is a stickler for discipline. It soon became clear that a drama of Shakespearian proportions was in the making.

At first MR acted cautiously. He created the post of Chief of Defence Staff [CDS] following the US and Indian precedents and elevated SF to that position. Chandraprema who wrote from the Rajapaksa perspective says, “As the tensions between Fonseka and the government worsened, Gota had telephoned Lalith Weeratunga and told him that there was a move to have Major General Jagath Jayasuriya arrested. By this time, the government had become intensely suspicious of Fonseka and deemed it necessary to remove him from the position of Army Commander. The following morning Fonseka was appointed CDS, and Jagath Jayasuriya was made army commander, Karannagoda was made advisor to the President and Chandrasiri [Fonseka’s chosen successor] was sworn in as the Governor of Northern province”.

As Minister of Finance MR vetoed the proposal to increase the intake of the army on the sensible grounds that usually there is demobilization after a war. In any case the economic situation did not permit such an outlay. Similarly MR refused to buy a consignment of Chinese weaponry ordered by SF since the war was over and savings on the defence budget was mandatory. The decision not to expand the military was resented by SF because it was a way of depriving him of the post of Field Marshal that he greatly coveted.

On the other hand MR, the consummate politician, was aiming to capitalize on his unprecedented popularity by calling for an early election to be held in April 2010. In preparation for this eventuality a massive conference hall was built within the premises of Temple Trees where delegates from the different professions and various parts of the countryside were brought to be told about the progress made during MR’s first term and be treated to a sumptuous meal. I was invited to be a regular speaker at the meetings for professionals. In fact I became a lead speaker at MR’s first re-election rally held in Kurunegala.

The army reverted to its ceremonial role and provided a popular backstop to the many open air meetings that MR organized to celebrate victory over the LTTE. After SF was sidelined Jagath Jayasuriya, an old Royalist and an officer of the old school, who was widely believed to have been a relative of the President, held the fort without a massive outcry. A disgruntled SF was then wooed by the Opposition which realized that a politician had no chance in challenging MR. A new face had to be brought onto the arena and SF was the natural choice. Only he had the rage and the courage to take up the challenge and accept the poisoned apple offered to him by the Opposition.

GR on the other hand could not escape the orbit of his brother and family. He made use of his management skills and access to the manpower of the army to engage in spectacularly improving public works, particularly in the big cities. He thereby earned a reputation as a hard working, honest and efficient Secretary which added to his brother’s appeal to the country. Both he and SF developed into competent Sinhala orators with the latter often using salty language he was famous for as Army Commander.

(The Sarath Amunugama autobiography is available at the Vijitha Yapa Bookshop)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.