Soldiering on after the Central Bank bomb and intricacies to tender boards

Since I continued to remain as one of the government nominees on the United States Education Foundation, one of my responsibilities was to sit on interview boards to select scholars going to the US under various programmes, including the Fulbright programme. At these, interview boards we came across Sri Lankan men and women with post-graduate degrees who possessed considerable talent. Most of them were products of our University system. They demonstrated that whatever the problems at the general level or the bottom end, the cream of the system was of very high quality. In an environment where there was much criticism of our Universities, much of it deserved, it was heartening to see that production of high quality was not only possible, but that it was actually taking place.

One of the meetings of the US Educational Foundation was scheduled for the evening of January 31, 1996. In the morning of this day LTTE terrorists blasted with explosives the multi-storeyed Central Bank building in the Fort, with the loss of over 70 lives. Everyone was in a state of shock and gloom. Some of us who had friends in the Central Bank suffered from anxiety in addition to shock, not knowing their fate. Reports of the loss of life were most depressing. The community reacted spontaneously with large numbers queuing up to donate blood. Some of my colleagues in the Ministry wished to know whether to cancel the afternoon meetings. I wanted them held.

Life must go on, and work must go on. We must have the nerve and the stamina to go on whatever the state of external circumstances. The US authorities wanted to know whether to cancel the evening meeting. I said “No,” we would hold it. When I went for this meeting some of the American members of the Board were watching the horrible scenes on TV. They shook hands with me and offered their condolences. They agreed that we should not give in to terror and that one of the best ways of demonstrating this was to carry on with normal work.

Sitting on Cabinet appointed tender boards, in addition to sitting on some of the Ministry tender boards were becoming a major preoccupation. There were times that I was sitting on about 12 tender boards almost at the same time, about eight of which I was chairing. I was also fated to handle some of the larger, more difficult and even more controversial ones. Some of these tender boards included the towns North of Colombo water supply; development of a new town at Athurugiriya; Uda Walawe left bank development; the controversial Sitawaka Industrial park, where the decision of two previous tender boards were cancelled: selling mineral sands; certain areas of port development; and being Chairman of the Standing Tender Board for all purchases by the State Pharmaceuticals Corporation above a certain financial threshold.

This latter responsibility alone meant that one had to deal with several tenders at one sitting, dealing with anything from purchasing Paracetamol to x-ray films, to various types of injections to the numerous other purchases of the Corporation. There were days, when one spent several hours sitting on these tender boards. One day I informed the Minister that on the previous day I had spent only half a day on my substantive responsibilities in education. The previous day involved sitting on three tender boards one after another which involved several tenders, purchasing drugs for the Pharmaceutical Corporation, purchasing wheat for the CWE and selling mineral sands for the Mineral Sands Corporation (Ilmenite, Zircon and Rutile). This went on for almost six hours at a stretch ending up at 8.30 in the night.

Then, since I had got into inconvenient habits, I cleared a half day’s papers from my own Ministry till 10 p.m. Some of these tenders are hotly contested and some agents and principals were developing habits of orchestrating implied threats and subtle intimidation. One threat was to “expose” matters in the newspapers. I was not particularly bothered. One always ran the risk of some party imagining himself to be aggrieved or deliberately as a tactic getting hold of some newspaper and planting a series of half truths, which are of course deadlier than full or outright lies. That was an occupational hazard.

But I always took the precaution of dictating the minutes and the final report of the tender board myself setting out all the facts, arguments and the reasons for our decision. We could of course err, because some of the decisions had to rest on an evaluation, appreciation and a balance of finer points, which sometimes could become a subject for later legal arguments. An aggrieved party could always go to the Supreme Court, and if they had a valid case, obtain a judgment in their favour. It is because even trained judges err that we have an appeals system finally ending up in the Supreme Court.

All I could do was to ensure that in any tender board I sat on, we took a decision in all conscience on the facts and that we were free from egregious error or serious negligence. There were other problems too. Some tenderers tried to peddle influence or offer inducements. One had therefore to keep a hawk eye on some members of some of the technical evaluation committees. In my long experience, I had found technical evaluation committees wrong on so many occasions that I always subjected them to a searching cross examination, and sometimes sought advice confidentially from qualified friends who had no interest in the tenders concerned.

On involved commercial issues, I sometimes sought advice and a point of view from persons known to me who had long experience in business and business practices. Such advice was almost always extremely useful and I was able to put them to telling practical effect. Sometimes there arose interesting situations to manage. One such was when one of my friends and colleagues who was chairing a technical evaluation committee in a billion rupee tender pertaining to another Ministry, the tender board of which I was chairing informed me confidentially and with evident discomfort that the Minister concerned had summoned him to find out what was happening and made strong suggestions as to whom the tender should go! Only he and I knew of this development. Unfortunately for the Minister concerned the tender board could not support his views and had to recommend a competent party who was cheaper by tens of millions of rupees. Nobody contested the decision.

There were other interesting experiences. Chairing an important tender board of another Ministry, I discovered to my horror in their files a letter sent by President Kumaratunga to the Minister concerned blacklisting an internationally recognized party because of some shoddy work they had done on a previous tender. The President’s irritation was understandable. There indeed had been a lapse. The problem however was that whoever who drafted the letter for her had couched it in very broad and even defamatory terms, inaccurately blowing up a relatively minor issue out of all proportion and asserting certain matters which were at almost complete variance with the facts.

I had no doubt that if by any chance this letter leaked to the media, there was every possibility of a huge claim as damages by this company. I therefore immediately rang her at Temple Trees. The switchboard put me through to someone who said that she was at a meeting. I said that the matter was very urgent and that I needed to speak to her. The person was hesitant. I then said, “Just buzz her and say that I am on the line and that the matter is urgent. Then she would decide whether to speak to me or not.”

The President came on the line. I mentioned the problem. She indignantly mentioned the previous dereliction of this party which clearly indicated to me that whoever who had briefed her had seriously exaggerated matters. I clarified matters to an extent, because the lapse concerned was reported on by the press. But she was not fully convinced. I then told her “I am not asking you to listen to me. I am only asking you to show a copy of the letter to the Attorney General and get his advice, before it leaks out.” Then I went on to further analyze the serious defects in the letter. It transpired that she had sent copies of this letter to about five other relevant Ministers.

By this time she began to understand that she had been misled. She said that she would immediately recall all the letters, telling me in the process, “I have sent one to your Minister also. Please get it from him and send it to me.” I once again asked her to consult the Attorney General first. But now she understood that she had been made to sign an inaccurate and damaging letter. She bitterly told me who had put it up to her and understandably vented her frustration. She was acting with all good intentions and in what she thought was the best interests of the country. But someone had played fast and loose with the information given to her.

These are some of the hazards faced by heads of state or government sometimes. There were two Secretaries present as fellow members of the tender board when this conversation took place. They were completely astounded that when I saw the letter, I reached for the phone and rang the President. In fact, one of them presumably after he recovered from the shock said “What you did. was great,” and then went on to say rather emotionally, “My Minister would never have done this. He wouldn’t run the risk of rocking the boat. He would have kept quiet.”

But to me this was a natural action. I went on the basis that I had been appointed a Secretary to a Ministry by the President in terms of the constitution of Sri Lanka. She was therefore my appointing authority. I therefore owed her a duty to take the action I did.

One could always have had cogent counter arguments for not doing anything. This was for instance not an “education” matter. This was also a tender board of another Ministry, not my Ministry. My job as the Chairman of the Tender Board was to, along with my colleagues on the board and with the assistance of the technical evaluation committee, to determine the tender and make recommendations to the line Minister who, if he agreed with the recommendations. would then take these to Cabinet for approval.

There were therefore sufficiently strong arguments for my not intervening in a letter sent by the President to a Minister. On the other hand, the matter was not entirely irrelevant to the business at hand. The contents of the letter affected the standing of a party to the tender. But here again, one could have argued that one could properly have followed the President’s determination and kept this party out of the tender. It was not my problem. Then of course, the whole thing would have blown up, because the whole thing was bound to come out, leading to enormous problems. No one could have faulted me for just following the President’s instructions to the Minister concerned.

In any subsequent controversy, I could have quoted the highest authority in the land, who also happened to be Minister of Finance. But as I have related throughout these memoirs, I have never shirked a duty however unpleasant or dodged an issue however inconvenient or potentially damaging to my own prospects. I don’t think it is right for a public is servant, holding a high office of public trust to avoid issues and do nothing because it was personally safer to do nothing. If those are the standards that prevail and are practiced in a public service, it would cause considerable and unforeseen damage to the country.

Therefore, I have always insisted that anybody working with me would have to perform his duty without prevarication or excuse. In doing so one is not called upon to be aggressive, challenging or even sharply critical. It is a matter of laying out the facts with quiet dignity and giving well thought out reasons for any particular interpretations of those facts and the grounds of justification for your conclusions. Thereafter, the matter is out of your hands. There is no necessity whatsoever to invest any emotional attachment to your representations and get upset if they are turned down or even if you are criticized. You have done what you had to do. It is for others to take it or leave it.

Sitting on tender boards was not to complete my preoccupation with this area of work. The government was engaged in an exercise of critically examining prevailing tender procedures with a view to amending and updating them. I, along with some other senior officials was entrusted with the responsibility of commenting on the various drafts containing new material and changes. This concluded with a long final wrap up meeting with the President. I was satisfied that I had been of some use, because some of my suggestions were adopted at this meeting and are contained in the new publication on tender procedures.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris)

The anatomy of the bond scam and the Ranil – Sirisena fallout

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.