SLPP calls for CIABOC Director General’s removal over alleged misconduct

The Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) yesterday called for the removal of the Director General of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC), alleging abuse of power and unlawful conduct in relation to legal proceedings involving former SriLankan Airlines Chairman Kapila Chandrasena.

Addressing the media, SLPP General Secretary Sagara Kariyawasam claimed that CIABOC had made an “illegal request” before court seeking the cancellation of Chandrasena’s bail on the basis that unlawful sureties had been submitted.

Kariyawasam said two individuals initially presented as sureties for Chandrasena had been rejected by the court registrar, following which two legally acceptable sureties were produced and bail was granted.

“The real situation is that the first two sureties were rejected by the court registrar. Thereafter, Kapila Chandrasena obtained bail by presenting two valid sureties without any legal issue,” he said.

He alleged that the Bribery Commission later sought to have Chandrasena remanded again on the assumption that the rejected sureties had been accepted by court.

“This request made before court by the Bribery Commission is completely unlawful. We have never seen the prosecuting party in a case show this level of interest regarding the suitability of sureties,” Kariyawasam said.

Kariyawasam further alleged that the Director General of CIABOC had previously threatened Chandrasena.

“He had allegedly told Kapila Chandrasena that he would be pushed to a point where he would hang himself,” he claimed.

The SLPP General Secretary called on the three commissioners of Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption to investigate the conduct of the Director General and inform Parliament if disciplinary action or removal was warranted.

“If the Director General under your authority has abused the law in this manner, why are you hesitating to investigate and recommend his removal to Parliament?” Kariyawasam questioned.

He also raised concerns over whether political influence was affecting the independence of the Bribery Commission.