Amãna Bank marks 15th anniversary with commemorative cover and stamp

Deputy Postmaster General of the Sri Lanka Department of Posts, Premachandra Herath, hands over Amãna Bank’s Special Commemorative Cover and Stamp to Chairman Asgi Akbarally, in the presence of Managing Director/CEO Mohamed Azmeer and Director of the Philatelic Bureau, Lanka De Silva

Amãna Bank PLC in collaboration with the Philatelic Bureau of the Department of Posts of Sri Lanka launched a special commemorative cover and stamp in celebration of the Bank’s 15th anniversary.

The ceremonial launch was held on 12 August to honour and mark Amãna Bank’s contribution to Sri Lanka’s financial services landscape and its distinctive role as the country’s first and only licensed commercial bank operating entirely on the non-interest based banking model.

The commemorative cover and stamp pay tribute to Amãna Bank’s journey since commencing operations in 2011, reflecting 15 years of enabling growth, enriching lives, and delivering value through a development-focused and people-friendly approach to banking.

Since opening its doors, Amãna Bank has steadily expanded its presence across the country, serving a growing customer base through its 80+ branch and self-banking centre network while remaining focused on Retail, SME, and development-oriented banking with a selective approach to corporates. The Bank’s asset-backed banking model continues to channel financing towards productive sectors of the economy, supporting entrepreneurs, households, and businesses in a manner aligned with its values and customer-centric promise.

The ceremonial event was graced by the Deputy Postmaster General of the Sri Lanka Department of Posts, Premachandra Herath; Director of the Philatelic Bureau of the Sri Lanka Department of Posts, Lanka De Silva; Founder Chairman of Amãna Bank, Osman Kassim; incumbent Chairman, Asgi Akbarally; current Managing Director/CEO, Mohamed Azmeer; Founder Directors Tyeab Akbarally, Ruzly Hussain, Jazri Magdon Ismail and Dr. A. A. M. Haroon; Founder Managing Director/CEO, Faizal Salieh; current Board of Directors; Sharia Supervisory Council; OrphanCare Trustees; along with the Bank’s Management Committee, Senior Management and Branch Managers. Prior to the stamp launch, the Bank marked its 15th anniversary by ceremoniously hoisting the Sri Lanka National Flag at its Corporate Office premises.

Speaking at the stamp launch Amana Bank’s Chairman Asgi Akbarally stated, “As we celebrate the 15th anniversary of Amãna Bank, this commemorative First Day Cover and stamp stand as a lasting tribute to a remarkable journey built on vision, resilience, and trust. It symbolizes not only the milestones we have achieved, but also the enduring confidence placed in us by our customers, shareholders, regulators, colleagues, and the communities we are privileged to serve.

More than a commemoration of the past, it reflects the values and purpose that continue to guide us forward. It tells the story of an institution founded on a bold vision, nurtured by the dedication of its people, and strengthened by the loyalty of its stakeholders. As we mark this significant occasion, we reaffirm our commitment to creating sustainable value, supporting businesses and individuals, and contributing meaningfully to the economic and social progress of our nation.”

Also sharing his views Amana Bank Managing Director/CEO Mohamed Azmeer said, “We are truly honoured to have been given the opportunity to celebrate our 15th anniversary with this special commemorative cover and stamp launch.

There is something particularly meaningful about commemorating an institutional milestone through a postage stamp. Stamps preserve moments in history and provide future generations with a window into the people, institutions and events that have contributed to the progress of a nation. The special commemorative cover and stamp being unveiled will therefore serve as a lasting symbol of Amãna Bank’s fifteen-year journey and the values upon which it was built.”

The launch of the Special Commemorative Cover and Stamp forms part of Amãna Bank’s wider 15th anniversary celebrations, which recognise the Bank’s journey of purpose-led growth and its continued aspiration to enable growth and enrich lives across Sri Lanka.