Viet Nam and Sri Lanka deepen economic ties

Hold Third Joint Sub-committee Meeting on Trade and Viet Nam–Sri Lanka Business Forum

The Third Meeting of the Viet Nam–Sri Lanka Joint Sub-committee on Trade was recently convened under the Co-Chairmanship of Viet Nam Industry and Trade Deputy Minister Phan Thi Thang and Sri Lanka Trade Secretary K.A. Vimalenthirarajah.

The two sides reviewed and evaluated the implementation of the outcomes agreed upon at the Second Meeting, acknowledging the continuous improvement of bilateral trade turnover which reached $ 278.9 million in 2024 and $ 225.4 million in the first 10 months of 2025. Both sides agreed that the potential for cooperation remains substantial, especially given the complementary nature of the trade structure of the two economies.

Within the framework of the meeting, the two delegations exchanged views on a series of priority cooperation areas, including market access facilitation, textiles and garments, footwear, fisheries, trade promotion, logistics, air connectivity, and investment collaboration in construction and infrastructure development, among others.

On trade facilitation, both sides agreed to enhance technical dialogue on customs standards and non-tariff measures to help businesses reduce compliance costs and improve market access. Regarding rice trade, Viet Nam affirmed its capacity to supply stable and diversified rice varieties to Sri Lanka.

In the textile and footwear sector, Sri Lanka proposed cooperation under the EU’s GSP framework on cumulative origin; Viet Nam acknowledged this request and expressed readiness to strengthen cooperation in training, design, product development, and supply chain connectivity. In the field of fisheries, Sri Lanka noted the need for enhanced technical cooperation and increased import of raw materials, while Viet Nam suggested expanding the product list and simplifying quarantine processes.

Both sides agreed to reinforce trade promotion activities, promote linkages between VIETRADE and Sri Lanka’s Export Development Board (EDB), implement established action programs, and increase the exchange of business delegations, participation in fairs and exhibitions, and B2B interactions.

Acknowledging the strategic positions of both countries in global supply chains, the two sides agreed to consider organising the Viet Nam–Sri Lanka Logistics Business Forum in the near future. They also agreed to soon establish a direct flight route between Colombo and Ho Chi Minh City to support trade, investment and tourism.

Sri Lanka expressed interest in attracting Vietnamese investments in infrastructure, energy, ICT, electrical and electronic industries, agricultural processing, logistics, and supporting industries. The Meeting also covered cooperation in 3D printing, quality control, software–digital transformation, Ayurveda medicine, and shipbuilding–ship repair.

At the conclusion of the Meeting, Deputy Minister Phan Thi Thang and Secretary K.A. Vimalenthirarajah signed the Agreed Minutes, which will serve as a basis for future cooperation.

The Third Meeting of the Viet Nam–Sri Lanka Joint Trade Sub-committee is regarded as an important step forward, creating new momentum for economic and trade relations as Viet Nam and Sri Lanka celebrate the 55th anniversary of diplomatic relations in 2025. The two sides will work closely to effectively implement agreed-upon initiatives and support businesses of the two countries in integrating more deeply into regional and global supply chains, with a shared goal of increasing bilateral trade turnover to $ 1 billion as agreed during the visit to Viet Nam by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake.

Following the Meeting, Deputy Minister Phan Thi Thang paid a courtesy call on Sri Lanka’s Trade Minister Wasantha Samarasinghe. The two discussed a wide range of matters, including the possibility of signing a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on rice trade to help ensure Sri Lankan food security, and importing Vietnamese agricultural products and fruits to support Sri Lankan tourism industry.

Later the same day, the Embassy of Viet Nam in collaboration with The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce organised the “Viet Nam–Sri Lanka Business Forum,” with the attendance of Viet Nam’s Ambassador Trinh Thi Tam and Ceylon Chamber Deputy Secretary General Alikie Perera. Strong participation from Sri Lankan businesses reflected the growing momentum to strengthen commercial ties between the two countries.

The program featured opening remarks by Deputy Minister Thang, and a presentation by the Vietnamese delegation highlighting priority sectors for cooperation, including trade and investment; agriculture and aquaculture; industrial collaboration; logistics; and textiles, garments, and footwear. Sri Lanka–Greater Mekong Business Council President Nimal Rathnayake and The Ceylon Chamber Chief Economist Shiran Fernando also briefed participants on some insights of Sri Lanka economy and recommendations for bilateral cooperation.

During the Q&A session, a highlight emerged in the area of coffee cooperation. While Viet Nam is known globally as a leading coffee producer, the delegation emphasised that Sri Lanka’s climate and soil conditions are highly suitable for coffee cultivation. Vietnamese enterprises expressed strong interest in exploring investment opportunities in Sri Lankan coffee plantations and sharing technical expertise.

Discussions further explored cooperation across agriculture and aquaculture, logistics, textiles and garments, machinery, broader trade and investment, and the early establishment of direct flights between the two countries.

Viet Nam currently ranks 48th among Sri Lanka’s export destinations and 17th among its import partners. In 2024, Sri Lanka’s exports to Viet Nam reached $ 40.09 million, marking a 10% increase compared to 2023, while imports from Viet Nam grew by 27% to $ 238.81 million. Key Sri Lankan exports to Viet Nam include knitted fabrics, yarn, animal feed, rubber, textiles and tea packages, whereas Viet Nam exports yarn, knitted fabric, base metal, woven fabric, telephones, electronic equipment and components, rubber to Sri Lanka.

As Sri Lanka works to regain economic momentum in the aftermath of Cyclone Ditwah, international trade missions play a vital role in strengthening confidence, reigniting investor interest, and reaffirming that the country remains open for business. As a close traditional friend, Viet Nam has always stood by Sri Lanka in difficult times, and this visit further underscored that enduring solidarity.