Behavioural patterns of mosquitoes and their impact on spread of Dengue infection

Sri Lanka is currently experiencing a widespread outbreak of dengue. Dengue is transmitted by mosquitoes of the genus Aedes. In Sri Lanka, Aedes aegypti, a species that thrives in urban areas, and Aedes albopictus, which primarily inhabits semi-urban or rural habitats, are the primary vectors of dengue. Aedes species are also the transmitters of chikungunya infections and yellow fever in South American countries.

One of the major efforts to control the spread of dengue is to limit or eliminate their breeding places. These mosquitoes are generally known as “container breeders” because they prefer small water collections as found in discarded items such as tin cans, coconut shells, plastic cups, open-mouthed bottles, and discarded tyres. Indoor preferential breeding sites are ant traps, flower vases, and small water collections in traps under refrigerators, and small collections in and around bathrooms. The amount of water is not a limiting factor. Sometimes a trace of dampness is sufficient, while overhead water tanks, with a fair amount of water, are not overlooked. These mosquitoes avoid water with dead and decaying organic matter. Hence, the time and effort expended in unblocking blocked drains and such surroundings are less effective, though a healthy measure when it comes to dengue mosquito control. Water collecting in fallen leaves under trees is also not spared. Aedes albopictus prefers tree holes and leaf axils for egg laying.

Aedes mosquitoes are easily identified with the naked eye. Their body colour is generally black with white scales on the body, making distinctive patterns. Aedes aegypti has a lyre-shaped marking on the back of the thorax behind the head, while Aedes albopictus is distinguished by a single white line in the middle of the thorax (see figure).

Both species are active during the day. The activity starts at dawn and lasts until dusk. They remain inactive during the night. However, strong white artificial light is known to activate them. This daytime behaviour puts schoolchildren and people who work outdoors, during the day, at high risk of being bitten. Indoor biting continues during daylight hours.

Only female mosquitoes bite humans and animals for blood meals, while the males subsist on plant juices. This is because the proteins in blood meals are necessary for the maturation of eggs in their ovaries. However, all female mosquitoes are not “equal opportunity feeders”. That means they have their preferences for victims over others. People have often wondered why only some individuals are harassed by mosquitoes while some escape the onslaught. Similarly, it is rare for two or three siblings in a family to have dengue simultaneously.

As mentioned earlier, mosquitoes are not equal-opportunity biters or feeders. They are known to be attracted to the microbiota, or the microorganisms that colonise our skin. Another factor that attracts mosquitoes is the amount of carbon dioxide emitted in the breath. This implies that individuals who engage in physical activities during the day are at a higher risk of being bitten. Pregnant women and alcohol drinkers also fall into this category.

Some studies show that mosquitoes are attracted to certain colours worn by individuals – red, orange, and black being most preferred. Individual body odour has been attributed as an attractant for these mosquitoes, and some point out that the individual genetic constitution is also an important factor. A study published in 2015 found that DNA may account for nearly 67% of mosquito attraction. Involving sets of twins,

Aedes mosquitoes have evolved survival strategies to perpetuate their lines, withstanding adverse environmental conditions. For instance, the ability to lay eggs in small water collections and sometimes require only a trace of moisture or dampness in the breeding site. The other important strategy is known as vertical or transovarial transmission. These mosquitoes can transmit the virus to their eggs so that the new progeny remains already infected. This process is not continuous but wanes off. This is the mechanism that allows many mosquito-borne viruses to persist and maintain the lineage during harsh or adverse climatic conditions or when susceptible vertebrate hosts are not found easily.

The factors that make an individual more attractive to mosquitoes may be at work when we notice that only some in a group are harassed by them, while the others are spared most of the time.

Judging by the pictures we see every day in visual media makes one wonder whether we could ever eradicate Aedes mosquitoes’ breeding sites. The top Aedes mosquito breeding sites have been factory and construction sites, government buildings, prisons, religious places, schools and hospitals… Cleaning programmes should be carried out by each establishment with daily drills supervised by a sanitary officer.

Elimination of breeding sites does not imply the complete elimination of the mosquito from the island but reducing the prevalence of Aedes to an extent that can no longer be a threat.

Apart from control measures, such as treating the sick to eliminate the source of the virus, cleaning premises and public places, destroying and removing containers, such as tin cans, coconut shells, ice cream and yoghurt cups, a massive effort is being carried out by the fogging squads. It should be noted that fogging is a temporary measure and has many disadvantages. The process involves ultra-low-volume spraying of insecticides, like specific organophosphates and synthetic pyrethroids, primary technical malathion and Perguard FG 161, using a fogging machine. Very few indoor fogging of houses and interior fogging of buildings are seen in the mass media every day. Instead, large areas outside premises are shown to be fogged. Fogging only targets adult moving or resting Aedes and does not affect breeding sites. Fogging does not spare other valuable insects such as bees and other pollinators, impacting food production. Certain criteria govern the fogging process. The time of the day (during peak activity of Aedes), weather patterns (wind can blow away the insecticide), use of the correct formula and minimising the effect on the environment. In many instances, only the worker who does the fogging seems to wear a mask. Interior of houses and buildings do not appear to have been subjected to fogging. It is not certain whether people are informed of the process. In fact, several criteria must be followed: 1. Timing of fogging. 2. People must be instructed to have doors and windows open. 3. Dishes of food, fish tanks, and bird cages are to be covered. 4. To stay away from doors and windows while fogging is on. 5. All electrical switches, heating and cooking equipment should be in the off position. 6. All humans and animals should not enter the fogged houses but remain outside for at least 30 minutes after the fogging. 7. Ensure that adults and children do not follow the fogging parties from house to house. It is also important to repeat fogging cycles to target the newly emerging adults from the breeding sites.

There are problems with other methods of control as well. Some dengue-infected people may remain asymptomatic, and those with milder infections may not seek medical intervention as required. This fact leaves a considerable reservoir of the virus in the community for the feeding Aedes. The rush seems to be more oriented to catching and persecuting people who harbour breeding sites rather than educating the public, particularly the teachers, students, parents and even the health workers involved in the control programme. I assume that I have presented a fair description of the behaviour of the Aedes mosquitoes and a few of the control measures used by our Ministry of Health to combat the spreading scourge.

Viral epidemics have a fluctuating pattern, peaking and then declining on their own. Remember the Covid-19 pandemic. However, the alarming spread of dengue must be tackled immediately. The launching of the “Stop Dengue Now” programme is timely and commendable. This programme was officially launched a few days back. The programme is to be implemented by the Ministry of Health, mass media, and the private sector and media partners to support the national response to the ongoing dengue epidemic.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.