Commercial Bank appoints Hasrath Munasinghe as Executive Director/Chief Operating Officer

The Board of Directors of Commercial Bank of Ceylon PLC has announced the appointment ofHasrath Munasinghe as Executive Director/Chief Operating Officer of the Bank with effect from 27th April 2026.

He succeeds S. Prabagar, who retires on 26th April 2026 after serving in the position for four years, and completing a distinguished career of more than 30 years with Commercial Bank.

Munasinghe currently functions as Deputy General Manager – Corporate Banking at Commercial Bank and previously served as Deputy General Manager – Retail Banking and Marketing. Over the course of his career at the Bank, he has overseen Corporate Banking, Retail Banking, Digital Banking, Marketing, the Cards Business, Remittances, Customer Experience and Sustainability, guiding these key verticals to deliver sustained growth and strong performance outcomes. Munasinghe also serves as a Trustee of the Commercial Bank CSR Trust.

A corporate executive with 31 years of multidisciplinary experience across Banking, Telecommunications, FMCG and Media, Munasinghe brings more than 20 years of senior management experience to his new role, including 15 years in corporate management at Commercial Bank.

Throughout his tenure at Commercial Bank, Munasinghe has been instrumental in shaping progressive strategies that align business expansion with long term value creation. Recognised for his expertise in strategy development and business growth, he has consistently delivered measurable impact by driving portfolio expansion, strengthening asset quality and enhancing customer franchise value. He has led large, cross-functional teams across key banking segments to achieve sustained growth, improved profitability and disciplined execution in competitive market environments, while guiding operations through evolving regulatory, technological and market dynamics.

SLT Group reports strong FY 2025 performance driven by cost savings and efficiency

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.