A Meaningful Vesak

Now that the New Year celebrations are behind us, there is no doubt that young and old alike look forward to the next celebration, Vesak. It may not be too late to take a moment to contemplate the true meaning of this event and plan to spend this most important day for Buddhists in a meaningful way according to what the Buddha taught. The phrase ‘Happy Vesak’ will be plastered all over in greetings and decorations. It is true that the goal of Buddha’s teaching is the pursuit of happiness, which is universally expressed in the negative form as ending Dukkha. However, it must be questioned if indulging in an activity that brings fleeting happiness by satisfying five senses qualifies as a step towards that goal.

Dhamma describes the types of happiness that laity can have; there is nothing wrong with having an enjoyable time as long as we know fully well what we do. That wisdom transcends religions, but Buddhism emphasizes this fact: Doing things not knowing (moha) is considered a fetter (samyojana); believing that mere rules, rituals, ceremonies, or external practices can purify the mind or lead to liberation is the wrong view (silabbatha paramasa). In that respect, it is worthwhile probing the origins and meanings of the things we do on Vesak. If commonsense prevails, such activities must fulfill at least one of three goals: purification of mind – the most pertinent one, ensure the perpetuation of Sasana, and preserve cultural heritage.

Buddhist path to happiness or purification of mind has three components: mindful contemplation (bhavana), wholesome conduct (sila), and generosity (dana). Contemplating the body (kaya), sensations (Vedana), mind (Citta), and other natural laws (Dhamma), and how they relate to Dukkha and its cessation, i.e., Vipassana meditation, belongs in the first category. Generosity or giving, when done with the sole purpose of reducing attachment to worldly things and/or doing good for others belong to the third category dana. However, if we give expecting something in return, a payback here now or later, that becomes a transaction, and not a wholesome activity that purifies the mind. There is a slew of activities we do for Vesak that do not belong to any of the three categories. In recent times, increasingly more activities are driven by nothing but commercialization.

Among such activities, Vesak illuminations take a prominent place. During historical times, illuminating temples and paths leading to them allowed the devotees to visit them after dark. Our ancestors invented devices to protect oil lamps which they used for this purpose from elements: niches of various shapes and sizes built into parapet walls surrounding sacred sites and decorative covers often made of tender coconut leaves. The ubiquitous cloud wall is an example of the first category. Using tender coconut leaves for various decorative crafts is a traditional art form, but except in rural settings, it is rarely seen used in Vesak decorations today. The common octagonal Vesak lantern atapattama is supposed to be an early twentieth century invention that became popular when paper became an affordable commodity.

With the widespread availability of electricity, the illumination aspects of these devices have become obsolete. Their only value is as a traditional art form that must be preserved. Who can argue the artistic value and craftsmanship of ‘rotating lanterns,’ for example. However, does constructing or displaying them belong to any of the three categories leading to purification of mind? That question is even more applicable to mass produced, commercially available lanterns hung by the thousands along roadways already illuminated with streetlamps.

While traditional lanterns were made of biodegradable materials like bamboo and tissue paper, modern versions heavily utilize polythene and plastic. Millions of tons of non-degradable waste from these decorations end up in waterways and oceans. This “plastic Vesak” persists in the environment for centuries, an irony for a festival meant to honor life and nature.

The competition to build the most “spectacular” display, the highest number of lanterns, leads to a massive surge in electricity usage. Even during a period of national and global energy crises, this decorative lighting for political reasons and to maintain public morale. However, the sheer scale of these displays, often running throughout the night for many days, represents a significant drain on national resources and a source of pollution.

The tradition of Dansalas (alms stalls) is a beautiful expression of Sri Lankan generosity, where free food is offered to the public. Yet, the lack of coordination often leads to significant . In urban areas, it is common to see discarded piles of half-eaten meals, plastic cups, and lunch sheets littering the streets. Furthermore, food can sometimes be subpar hygienically, leading to the destruction of copious quantities of food items by health inspectors to prevent food poisoning.

Perhaps, the greatest waste is the “waste of intent.” The Buddha’s teachings emphasize Amisa-Puja or material offerings as secondary to Prathipaththi-Puja or practice of the teachings. When the focus shifts entirely to “trendy” activities of visiting Dansalas or sightseeing, the spiritual essence of the day is lost to commercialism and noise.

What are the better options? It would be helpful for the laity if the venerable Sangha could clarify which wholesome activities count as meritorious and what are mere traditions with no spiritual value. In the absence of such sage advice, the laity can decide for themselves what activities would have a lasting beneficial impact on society and the country compared to those that harm the environment and drain precious resources for a few hours of excitement.

Instead of buying mass-produced or imported lanterns that have no artistic value, should we teach children how to build a lantern using biodegradable materials? Teach them the value of creativity, and being proud of displaying one handmade lantern than hanging a dozen shop bought ones? Better yet, teach the traditional art of making lanterns out of young coconut leaves, Gokkola Kalawa, and preserve a valuable tradition. It is true that cutting a young frond of coconut leaves can lead to the loss of one bunch of nuts, but that can be avoided by leaving the unopened flower bud or the inflorescence untouched. Mature green and brown leaves can be used for added color variation.

More elaborate light displays like Pandals cost large sums of money and electricity. Can such resources be better used for the benefit of society, for example, by supplying teaching aids to a needy school, instead? Childhood malnourishment is on the rise; isn’t it more beneficial to give needy families dry rations instead of giving one meal to a merrymaking crowd? It is true that none of that would be glamorous, but not only that they would have a lasting positive impact without environmental and economic damage.

To honor the Buddha truly, our celebrations must evolve toward sustainability. Whether we are religious or not, we must move back to eco-friendly materials, practicing conscious energy consumption, and focus on charities that have a lasting impact on society than those that provide short lived enjoyment and excitement. By reducing material waste, the nation can ensure that the light of Vesak shines from within, rather than just from a plastic-wrapped lantern. Not only alternative altruistic actions would be more inline with the path that Buddha described, but that would also be a smart way to spend precious resources without causing economic and environmental harm. Considering the socio-economic situation of the country today, if we can be happy about doing some good for those less fortunate than us, without expecting anything in return, neither here nor in next life, which will be the spirit of Vesak. What is more, contemplating how that can be a wholesome act itself is a step towards purifying the mind.

Glimpses of an Ancient Civilisation Society and Culture in Jaffna

Glimpses of an Ancient Civilisation: Society and Culture in Jaffna (300 BC to AD 500)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.