Honouring The Legacy Of Nihal Seneviratne: A Tribute To A Life Of Service

Today, we pause to reflect and express our deepest appreciation for the remarkable life and legacy of Mr. Nihal Seneviratne, former Secretary General of Parliament, whose passing marks the end of an era in Sri Lanka’s parliamentary history.

Mr. Nihal Seneviratne, fondly known as ‘Galba’, was born in 1934 in Elpitiya and had his education at Royal College Colombo. He continued his higher education at the University of Peradeniya.  He graduated with a Bachelor of Laws (LLB) degree in 1959 and then entered the Law College from 1960, where I met him.  The following year, he completed the Advocate Final and took oaths as an Advocate.

Shortly after he joined Parliament as the Second Clerk Assistant, Nihal’s career in Parliament began under the guidance of Sam Wijesinhe, the legendary Secretary General. Over the years, he steadily rose through the ranks, serving as a Clerk Assistant in 1965 before eventually assuming the esteemed position of Secretary General in 1981. He dedicated over three decades to parliamentary service and retired as Secretary General in June 1994.

For 33 years, Mr. Seneviratne served with unwavering commitment as Secretary General of Parliament. His wisdom, integrity, and dedication left an indelible mark on our nation’s legislative process.

On 15 March, last year, I invited my parliamentary friend Nihal to join me to meet the Prime Minister, Harini Amarasuriya, and present her with a copy of my book on the Parliament of Sri Lanka. On that day, he presented the Prime Minister with a prepublication copy of his memoire on 33 years of his experience serving the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

On April 30th, at the Sri Lanka Foundation Institute auditorium—presided over by former Speaker Mr. Karu Jayasuriya—Mr. Seneviratne launched his memoir, “Memories of 33 Years in Parliament.” In this fascinating and informative book, he recounts noteworthy events that shaped our country’s political landscape. The memoir stands as a treasure trove of insights for current and future generations.

The role played by the parliamentary staff, risking their life and limbs to safeguard democracy in the country at times, could be selfless. This is exactly what the Parliament experienced when a JVP activist hurled a hand grenade during a Parliamentary Group Meeting; an MP and a staff member died while scores of others sustained injuries in August 1987. The incident is described lucidly by the author in one of the early chapters, under the title “Hand Grenade Attack in Parliament”. That goes down in history as the ghastliest act ever experienced by the Sri Lankan Parliament.

It is also interesting to note that the very first task assigned to young Seneviratne upon assuming duties was to take an MP into custody. This was in relation to the parliamentarian KMP Rajaratnam fasting in the Parliament. Seneviratne promptly attended to his task by studying the practice of ‘imprisoning’ an MP, as stipulated in British law, and came up with the plan the same day.

Nihal has not even spared the witty verbal jabs shared by the parliamentarians of his time. Dudley Senanayake, making a mockery of his Opposition counterpart Maithripala Senanayake’s nationalistic sentiments while being a husband to a Tamil wife, quipped, “He believes Sinhala only by day and the reasonable use of Tamil at night”, recalls the author.

Nihal was also the officer responsible for overseeing the relocation of the Parliament from the Galle Face to Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte, a fact that he reminisces with great pride.

His memoir is more than just a book—it is filled with fascinating insights and valuable lessons from someone who witnessed history unfold firsthand. His dedication serves as an example for all current and future public servants.  As we celebrate his life and legacy today, let us remember Mr. Nihal Seneviratne not only for his professional accolades but for the kindness and wisdom he shared so generously with everyone around him.

*Nandasiri (Nandi) Jasentuliyana,  Former Deputy Director General, United Nations, and Director, United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs. President Emeritus, International Institute of Space Law & Policy.