Abans Group Director Dr. Dubash honoured with Visionary Leadership Award

Accolade at the Top 50 Professional & Career Women Global Awards 2025

Abans Group has announced that Group Director Dr. Saroshi Dubash has been recognised with the ‘Visionary Leadership in Organizational Excellence’ Award at the 15th Top 50 Professional & Career Women Global Awards 2025, held at Shangri-La Colombo on 9 October.

This event, organised by Women in Management in partnership with global collaborators, awards and celebrates female leaders whose strategic vision, and leadership have created lasting impact in their industries and communities.

An alumna of the University of London with a BSc in Chemistry, Dr. Dubash furthered her education by earning an MBA and PhD from the University of Honolulu. As a second-generation leader at Abans Group, Dr. Dubash has been at the forefront of driving strategic growth, along with sustainability initiatives within the organisation for over the past three decades. She currently oversees key sectors including Abans Electricals and Manufacturing, Abans Logistics, and Crown City Developers.

In 2007, she led the introduction of Abans’ first e-commerce platform, www.buyabans.com, setting the company ahead of the digital transformation curve in Sri Lanka. Her forward-thinking approach also drove the development of a state-of-the-art logistics centre in Seeduwa, incorporating solar energy, rainwater harvesting, eco-friendly waste management, and advanced warehouse management systems, positioning Abans as a leader in sustainable logistics. This prestigious accolade is a reflection of her lasting contribution to Abans Group’s evolution into a modern, sustainable, and people-driven organisation.

Beyond business innovation, Dr. Dubash has remained a strong advocate for gender inclusion and talent development. She has served as Chairperson of the Women’s Chamber of Industry and Commerce (WCIC) and has contributed to organisations such as WILAT and the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce. Her leadership has inspired many within the company and beyond, to pursue excellence with integrity and vision.

The Abans Group, with a legacy that spans over five decades was founded in 1968. Today, Abans has grown into a diversified conglomerate comprising over 10,000 employees and 400 showrooms, with a presence across key sectors such as Retail Operations, Services, Logistics, Manufacturing, Real Estate, and Infrastructure Services. Dedicated to empowering lives Abans is recognised across Sri Lanka, and has played a pivotal role in modernising the country’s landscape and uplifting the quality of life for countless Sri Lankans by bringing some of the world’s leading brands to their doorstep.