Inaugural South Asia Bitumen Market Conference in Colombo next month

The inaugural South Asian Bitumen Conference (SABIT 2025) will be held on 13–14 November at the Cinnamon Life at City of Dreams, Colombo, bringing together decision-makers, policymakers, and industry specialists from across the bitumen value chain themed, “Bridging Trade, Infrastructure and Supply Chains Across South Asia and Beyond”.

Organised by Conference Connection, together Events and Hospitality Partner, Helanka Vacations Colombo, SABIT 2025 marks the expansion of its Global Bitumen Series into South Asia. The region is witnessing accelerating infrastructure investments, and SABIT aims to provide a dedicated forum for stakeholders to align, innovate, and build partnerships.

The two-day programme will commence with registrations and a networking reception in the evening on 13th November, with a SABIT 2025 Golf Game ice breaker earlier that afternoon. The official opening and Ministerial address by Sri Lanka Transport, Highways, Ports and Civil Aviation Minister Bimal Rathnayaka will take place on 14 November, followed by a keynote address by Sri Lanka Road Development Authority Chairman T. Paskaran.

Over 15 experts will deliver other presentations, case studies, panel sessions and one-on-one meetings covering: Supply, demand, and trade flows in South Asian bitumen markets; Refining, upgrading and blending capacity developments; New technologies for sustainable paving, emulsions, and asphalt solutions; Market access, procurement strategies and logistics and Regulatory, environmental, and policy frameworks.

SABIT 2025 is expected to attract senior representatives from refineries, trading houses, road authorities, contractors, infrastructure developers, logistics providers, technology firms and Bitumen specialists from South Asia, the wider Asia Pacific and Middle East.

Conference Connection General Manager Abby Seah said: “For the first time, Conference Connection’s highly successful Global Bitumen Series will be held in Sri Lanka and brings together leading players in key growing South Asian markets notably India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. Participants representing the government and various disciplines of refining, trading, shipping and consulting are expected to attend, providing an excellent platform for networking and exchange vital knowledge and market information.”

Helanka Vacations by MendisOne Chairman Rohitha Mendis said: “This event is an important milestone, highlighting Sri Lanka as a strategic hub for global industry collaboration and infrastructure development. SABIT 2025 underscores Sri Lanka’s growing role in the global bitumen and infrastructure sector, bringing international expertise, investment and valuable networking opportunities to our shores.”

SABIT 2025 is supported by the Sri Lanka High Commission, Singapore and endorsed by, Federation of Chambers of Commerce and Industry of Sri Lanka (FCCISL), Ceylon Institute of Builders (CIOB), Ceylon Association of Shipping Agents (CASA), Sri Lanka Philippines Business Council (SLPBC), YoungShip Sri Lanka, among others. Sponsorship opportunities are also available.

Media partners for SABIT 2025 include the World Petroleum and Bitumen Journal, Highways Today, Foreign investors on India (FiiNews), and Worldoils.