Sarnath joins Unesco World Heritage list

(The Times of India) - India’s ancient Buddhist site of Sarnath in Uttar Pradesh was on Saturday inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List, becoming India’s 45th site to receive this recognition. India ranks sixth globally and second in Asia Pacific Region for the most number of ‘World Heritage Sites’.

Interestingly, the ancient site of Sarnath was included in the tentative list of world heritage in 1998. The proposal to include the site in the list of world heritage was sent for the consideration of the World Heritage Committee in Jan 2025. The decision on the inscription was taken at the 48th session of the World Heritage Committee being held at Busan, South Korea.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi lauded the historic milestone. “A proud moment for every Indian! Delighted that Sarnath in Uttar Pradesh has been inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List. Sarnath has a close association with Lord Buddha, whose timeless message of wisdom, compassion and harmony inspires the world,” the PM said in a post on X.

It will also inspire more people across the world to come to Sarnath and connect with the ideals of Lord Buddha,” the PM added.

Culture minister Gajendra Shekhawat said that the inscription reaffirms India’s enduring role as the cradle of ideas that continue to inspire the world across generations.

“The serial property contains the architectural and archaeological remains of Sarnath, the sacred site where the Buddha is believed to have delivered his first sermon in the 6th century BCE and met his earliest disciples,” the description of the newly inscribed site highlights on the UNESCO website.

“Identified by the Buddha himself as one of the four principal Buddhist pilgrimage sites, Sarnath grew over many centuries through royal, monastic, and lay patronage, resulting in the construction of numerous stupas, temples, and viharas,” it added.

“After flourishing as a major Buddhist centre, Sarnath declined in the 12th century CE and fell into obscurity until its rediscovery in the 18th century. Today preserved as two archaeological zones, it remains both an important tourist destination and a revived pilgrimage site for Buddhists worldwide,” UNESCO states.

The culture ministry highlighted that the inscribed property comprises two component parts – Chaukhandi Stupa and the Archaeological Remains of Sarnath (Dhamekh Stupa, Dharmrajika Stupa, Mulagandgakuti Vihara, Ashokan Pillar, etc.) – located within Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh. Together these two components preserve the architectural and archaeological remains of the ancient site of Sarnath.

“World Heritage status would reinforce India’s identity as the birthplace of Buddhism and enhance cultural diplomacy with nations such as Japan, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Cambodia, Vietnam, South Korea and Mongolia,” the culture ministry said in a statement.

“This recognition would further support India’s efforts to promote Buddhist heritage as a bridge for international engagement and would also showcase India’s expertise in heritage conservation,” the ministry added.