Sri Lanka, China to strengthen immigration cooperation under new bilateral agreement

The Cabinet of Ministers on Monday approved the signing of a bilateral agreement with China to strengthen cooperation on immigration control, facilitate legitimate travel and combat transnational crime.

The agreement between Sri Lanka’s Department of Immigration and Emigration and the National Immigration Administration of the People’s Republic of China is aimed at improving institutional coordination, intelligence sharing and border management between the two countries.

Speaking to the media, Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa, the proposed agreement received clearance from the Attorney General and the Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Ministry before being submitted to the Cabinet for approval.

“The agreement will facilitate visa and immigration-related matters for Chinese and Sri Lankan citizens travelling for business, investment and tourism, while strengthening measures to counter organized crime and human trafficking,” he said at the weekly post-Cabinet meeting media briefing yesterday.

The framework will also provide for official visits between the heads of the two institutions and the organisation of training programs and workshops to improve the knowledge and skills of immigration officers,” No link to arrests, minister says

Dr. Jayatissa rejected suggestions that the agreement was introduced in response to the arrest of Chinese nationals holding tourist visas in connection with alleged online scams.

“There is no link between those arrests and the MoUs we enter into. This agreement comes as a result of extensive discussions held over a considerable period,” he said.

He noted that foreign nationals from various regions, including European and Central Asian countries, have also been involved in illegal activities in Sri Lanka, with such cases being dealt with by law enforcement authorities and the Courts.

The Cabinet Spokesman clarified that proposed partnership is a broader institutional initiative focused on strengthening immigration administration, information exchange, capacity building and security cooperation between Sri Lanka and China, rather than a response to any specific criminal cases.