Welcome bid to revive interest in Southern development issues

From the global South’s viewpoint the time could not be more appropriate to re-explore the possibility of forging ahead with realizing its long neglected collective development aims. It would seem that over the past three decades or more the developing world itself has allowed its outstanding issues to be thrust onto the backburner, so to speak, of the global development agenda.

Maybe the South’s fascination with the economic growth models advanced by the West and its apex financial institutions enabled the above situation to come to pass. However, time has also made it clear that the people of the South have gained little or nothing from their rulers’ fixation with the ‘development’ paths mapped out for them by Western financial institutions which came to prioritize ‘market-led’ growth.

At this juncture it is crucial that the more informed and enlightened sections among Southern publics come together to figure out where their countries should ‘go from here’ in terms of development, correctly defined. It is gladdening to note that the Regional Centre for Strategic Studies, Colombo (RCSS) has got down to this task.

On November 3rd, the RCSS launched its inaugural ‘RCSS Strategic Dialogue’ under the guidance of its Executive Director, Ambassador (Retd.) Ravinatha Aryasinha, under the theme, ‘Research Priorities for the Global South in Challenging Times’, and the forum was led by none other than by Dr. Carlos Maria Correa, the Executive Director of the Geneva-based South Centre, an institution that has played a pivotal role in Southern development and discourse over the decades.

Among the audience were thought leaders, diplomats, senior public servants, development experts and journalists. In what proved to be a lively, wide-ranging discussion issues at the heart of Southern development were analyzed and a general understanding arrived at which ought to stand the South in general and Sri Lanka in particular in good stead, going forward.

A thought-provoking point made by Dr. Carlos Correa was that the ‘US is helping India and China to come closer, and if India and China work together, the global economy and politics could change dramatically.’ He was referring to the tariff-related trade strife that the US has unleashed on the world and the groundwork that it could lay for the foremost Asian economic powers, India and China, to work consensually towards changing global trade terms in particular in favour of the global South.

The Asian powers mentioned could easily achieve this considering that they could hold their own with the US in economic terms. In other words there exists a possibility of the world economy being shaped in accordance with some of the best interests of the South, provided the foremost economic powers of the South come together and look beyond narrow self- interests towards the collective good of the South. This is a challenge for the future that needs taking up.

China sought to identify itself with the developing world in the past and this could be its opportunity to testify in practical terms to this conviction. In view of the finding that well over 40 percent of global GDP is currently being contributed by the major economies of the South, coupled with the fact that the bulk of international trade occurs among Southern economies, the time seems to be more than right for the South to initiate changes to the international economy that could help in realizing some of its legitimate interests, provided it organizes itself.

The above observation could be considered an important ‘take-away’ from the RCSS forum, which needs to be acted upon by governments, policy makers and think tanks of the developing world. It is time to revisit the seemingly forgotten North-South and South-South Dialogues, revive them and look to exploiting their potential to restructure the world economic system to suit the best interests of all countries, big or small. There are ‘research priorities’ aplenty here for those sections the world over that are desirous of initiating needed qualitative changes to the international economy for the purpose of ushering equity and fair play.

An important research question that arises from the RCSS forum relates to development and what it entails. This columnist considers this question a long- forgotten issue from the North-South Dialogue. It is no longer realized, it seems, that the terms growth and development cannot be used interchangeably. Essentially, while ‘growth’ refers to the total value of goods and services produced by a country yearly, ‘development’ denotes equity in the distribution of such produce among a country’s population. That is, in the absence of an equal distribution of goods and services among the people no ‘development’ could be said to have occurred in a country.

From the above viewpoint very few countries could be said to have ‘developed’ in particularly the South over the decades since ‘political independence’; certainly not Sri Lanka. In terms of this definition of development, it needs to be accepted that a degree of central planning is integral to a country’s economic advancement.

Accordingly, if steady poverty alleviation is used as a yardstick, the global South could be said to be stuck in economic backwardness and in this sense a hemisphere termed the ‘South’ continues to exist. Thanks to the RCSS forum these and related issues were raised and could henceforth be freshly researched and brought to the fore of public discussion.

We have it on the authority of Dr. Carlos Correa that a 7000 strong network of policymakers is at the service of the South Centre, to disseminate their scholarship worldwide if needed. The South would be working in its interests to tie-up with the South Centre and look to ways of advancing its collective interest now that it is in a position to do so, considering the economic clout it carries. It is time the South took cognizance fully of the fact that the global economic power balance has shifted decisively to the East and that it makes full use of this favourable position to advance its best interests.

The New International Economic Order (NIEO) of the sixties and seventies, which won mention at the RCSS forum, needs to be revisited and researched for its merits, but the NIEO was meant to go hand-in-hand with the New International Information Order (NIIO) which was birthed by Southern think tanks and the like around the same time. Basically, the NIIO stood for a global information order that made provision for a balanced and fair coverage of the affairs of the South. Going forward, the merits of the NIIO too would need to be discussed with a view to examining how it could serve the South’s best interests.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.