ComBank enables seamless account opening through enhanced self-onboarding platform

Driven by a strong commitment to digital innovation, enhanced accessibility, and an improved customer experience, the Commercial Bank of Ceylon has further enhanced its Self-Onboarding Platform, enabling new-to-bank customers to open accounts through a more seamless, secure and fully paperless digital experience, eliminating the need to visit a branch.

The upgraded platform now offers a fully digital solution that allows these customers, including Sri Lankans who live abroad, to open savings accounts instantly via the revamped platform on the web or via a mobile phone. The solution provides a digital account opening experience through real-time video identity verification and automated compliance screening.

The responsive, web-based ComBank Self Onboarding platform guides customers to open accounts conveniently from anywhere without visiting a branch or completing physical paperwork.

Chief Operating Officer Hasrath Munasinghe said the Bank continues to provide customers with a more convenient, accessible and seamless banking experience while supporting green banking goals and promoting a more environmentally responsible approach to banking by reducing the use of paper-based processes. “These initiatives are designed to enhance customer convenience by offering a secure, more efficient and flexible account opening experience that can be accessed securely from anywhere, at any time,” he added.

For customers, the benefits are direct and substantial. They gain a faster and more convenient way to open an account without physically visiting a branch, and those living overseas have a secure pathway to onboard with the Bank remotely. The digital process enhances compliance, improves security and accelerates access to fund deposits and related banking facilities.

The platform will continue to evolve with the introduction of new features and enhanced capabilities, reaffirming the Bank’s commitment to delivering a seamless, future-ready customer experience and setting new benchmarks in digital banking convenience, the Bank said.