Anura Is A Clever Man, Is He?

I recently watched a political discussion between my friends Shiral Lakthilaka and KW Janaranjana, the editor of Anidda, a weekly alternative newspaper.

I watched a different political chat between Professor Jayadeva Uyangoda and Professor Nirmal Ranjith Dewasiri last week, but it was qualitatively very poor and biased, compared to this discussion. Therefore, I found it worthy of evaluating the discussion between Shiral and Janaranjana. Please watch this YouTube video!

I would agree with Shiral to a reasonable extent, but there are also some matters that I will not be able to comply with him.  Let me first outline some of his positive and correct observations, leaving to discuss disagreeable matters later.

1. Shiral directly attacks one of the false fabrications that JVP/NPP cadres have been deliberately disseminating. As most people know, those party cadres try to explain the victory of the Malimawa as a turning point in Sri Lankan society, which marked the end of the era ruled by the elite and beginning of a new period of the common man. Shiral denies this lie with disgust. As everyone knows, the electoral victory in 1956 marked this turning point. This social transformation was confirmed by the non-elite leaders like Dahanayake, Premadasa, Wijetunga and Sirisena, who succeeded in ascending to power.  Even the Rajapaksas were not fully pledged elites like the members of the Senanayake, Kotelawala, Bandaranaike, Jayewardene and Wickremesinghe families.

2. Shiral correctly says that the JVP must take part of the responsibility of failures that the country had been experiencing in the post-independence era. This is an accusation relevant to all leftist parties, if he only means workplace disturbances such as strikes, work-to-rule campaigns and hartal-type island wide demonstrations. But he goes beyond the limits that a worker is entitled to fight for the protection of right of a labourer. It is true that there are no excuses for the JVP-led two unnecessary insurrections, which deprived the nation of more than 70,000 citizens and properties valued billions of rupees without any benefit to people and the country.

3. Shiral observes the nature of the so-called internal democracy that the JVP and its affiliated organisations function through. He simply highlights how the inter-university federation leaders make decisions without consulting representatives of various student segments, political and non-political.

let me point out some matters that I will not be able to comply with Shiral.

1. Shiral says that Anura is capable of balancing Sinhala and Tamil nationalisms more effectively, without jeopardising the government’s popularity among both the communities. According to him, Anura is a clever man. In English, there are so many synonyms for cleverness, i.e., smart, shrewd, genius, witty, tricky, cunning and some other words, even though their meanings sometimes overlap. Certainly, Anura is a clever man, but his cleverness is much closer to that of opportunistic Makandure Madush. Anyway, this act of deceiving is temporary; Anura will see the consequences of his dirty tactic shortly.

2. Shiral should have explained the pillars of what janakathavadaya (popularism) is depending on. He overlooks these three pillars, i.e., Sinhala nationalism that previously concentrating on the Rajapaksa family, Tamil separatism led by the Diaspora and strict anti-corruption mentality of the educated Sinhala middleclass.

3. He says that there has been a trend of emerging movements, instead of political parties.  This is a debatable matter.  Throughout the Sri Lankan history since the beginning of nationalist era, there had been movements, not parties, which sought political reforms, power or independence in our country.  The Ceylon National Congress, Suriyamal Movement, Sama Samaja Movement, Left Movement, Trade Union Movement, Federal Movement, Pancha Maha Balavegaya, the Movement to Protect the Motherland, Patriotic Peoples Liberation Movement (JVP), Eelam Movement and many more were movements rather than parties. Then there were party alliances, fronts or coalitions. Occasionally, there were isolated national figures emerged as leaders such as Ranil. Therefore, it is difficult to say, as Ranil recently did, the party system is obsolete, giving way to individual figures. If anarchist tendency is still in primary stage even in ideologically advanced countries, it is unrealistic assuming that our party system is in disarray. Many examples are available to understand that main parties have sometimes disintegrated, giving way to emerge for new ones. It has happened even in the UK, the USA and China. But nobody has interpreted that trend as the termination of party system. It is true that the UNP, the SLFP and the SLPP (pohottuwa) have lost their vote base, but it does not mean that our party system is approaching the end.

4. Shiral sometimes uses technical terms in politics unscrupulously.  For instance, the terms like middleclass, deduction theory, Bonapartism and state capitalism have no clearcut definitions; they have to be applied very  carefully to avoid the emergence of wrong connotations. For Shiral, the system existed under Sirima Bandaranaike also comes under the designation called state capitalism, even though there was a national capitalist class comprised of indigenous businesspersons during that regime. His prudent political knowledge fails to detect the difference between Singapore or China, where the state capitalism has prevailed and the countries like Sri Lanka or India, where the mixed economic system existed in the past. He follows the same manner in regard with other terms as well.

5. Shiral assumes that there is a liberal movement and a liberal class in Sri Lanka. The reality is that this country has never had such a movement or a class other than a very thin social stratum, especially in urban areas. It seems that many people misunderstand neoliberalism as an extension of liberalism. Liberalism has nothing to do with neoliberalism; conservatives developed that extreme economic ideology, because conservatism was devoid of a proper system and a theory related to economics to be consistent with their regressive political doctrine.

6. Shiral implies that Ranil is a politician with a high calibre, whose politics is based on morality and intelligence. This assumption is a half-truth. Certainly, Ranil is a mature and an experienced politician, and he was honest and straightforward, not now but, in the past. His dirty political opponents like Chandrika and Mangala tried to launch a smear campaign to damage his image by fabricating links between him and the LTTE and Batalanda torture centre, but people hardly believed in those false accusations. Nevertheless, he severely lost his credibility when people came to know that he had clandestine affairs with the Rajapaksas. This resentment came to be firm, when Ranil spent a political honeymoon with Rajapaksa loyalists overtly.

7. There is another matter that Shiral and his colleagues must consider. The common name of their group is called Dinana Dakuna or the Winning South (දිනන දකුණ).  This is not the correct name for them, because there are multiple connotations of that term. What is the South; geographically demarcated south or non-northern south or the right-wing in the absence of the Left? What is the line of separating two entities?  What are the criteria of selecting individuals, groups and parties into this entity called Dinana Dakuna? The traditional Left/Right division is not valid in politics anymore, because all parties are qualitatively in the Right now. The JVP/NPP is also in the camp of the Right, but they are in the far Right.

8. Shiral then turns to prescribe for the current problem, that is, the rule of the inefficient JVP/NPP government. He attempts to find a substitution through the amalgamation of four forces or their leaders. According to him, there are five leaders, i.e., Ranil, Dilith, Namal, Sajith and Milinda Moragoda, who is out of the scene now. He prefers Ranil despite this mature leader’s declared poor health condition. But the reality is that the SJB led by Sajith cannot be cornered, if anybody wants to defeat the incumbent government. Meanwhile, Shiral has overlooked the Harini-factor, which apparently causes damage to the coherence of the government.

9. Shiral seems unaware of the nature of the dominant economic ideology in this world. When this ideology called neoliberalism came out of the University of Chicago to become the one and only doctrine in the sphere of economics after experiments of decades, corruption followed as its beloved shadow which never to be left alone. He dreams of seeing a country free of corruption in future. If so many ministers of the incumbent government even in Australia have allegations of corruption, what is the point in talking about good governance in a country like Sri Lanka?

Finally, it must be said that Janaranjana, who conducted the interview, has done a marvellous job, but he should and could have given a more perplexing task for Shiral, who came as the resource person.