Colombo Academy of Hospitality Management celebrates Australian qualification achievements at 13th graduation ceremony

The Colombo Academy of Hospitality Management, Sri Lanka’s largest private hospitality, food, tourism, and events education provider, conducted its 13th Graduation Ceremony in partnership with the William Angliss Institute (RTO: 3045) in style at the prestigious Shangri-La Hotel, Colombo.

The graduation ceremony commenced with a traditional Kandyan dance performance that impressed the audience, including the William Angliss Institute delegation, followed by a welcome address by Grant Dreher, Chief Executive Officer, William Angliss Institute, Australia.

The Chief Guest, Diarra Wickremasinghe – Director, Owner, and Founder of Pink Salt Restaurant, Brown Sugar Café, Isle Amore Pizzeria, Brown Sugar Doughnuts, and Daily Dough, and an alumna of the Institute, delivered a motivating speech about her success in the hospitality industry and her future aspirations, which was inspiring for all present.

The globally recognised Australian qualifications awarded by the William Angliss Institute included the Certificate IV in Kitchen Management, Certificate IV in Patisserie, Diploma of Event Management, Advanced Diploma of Travel and Tourism Management, and the Advanced Diploma of Hospitality Management.

The celebrations continued with the announcement of numerous special awards for individual students’ achievements. Over 600 students, parents, and industry representatives attended this dazzling event to witness a significant milestone for the graduates as they celebrated their academic journey and future in the hospitality industry. A delightful lunch was catered to all attendees after the conclusion of the graduation ceremony.

To date, more than 2,500 Colombo Academy of Hospitality Management students have graduated with William Angliss Institute qualifications and have commenced their global careers in hospitality. Those interested in pursuing a similar academic journey can contact the Colombo Academy of Hospitality Management on 011 7 999 800 or visit www.cahm.lk for more information.

Bourse upbeat over positive effects of Budget 2026; investor sentiment up

AMW strengthens Southern presence with the opening of a new showroom in Matara

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.