Aragalaya:Name the conspirators

Aragalaya (2022) is in the news again. Speaking at the launch of a book, Aragalaye Balaya authored by Dr. Sunanda Madduma Bandara, on Thursday, ex-President Ranil Wickremesinghe and former Speaker Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena reminisced about their experiences during the 2022 popular uprising and the subsequent wave of anarchical violence. Wickremesinghe denied having employed undemocratic methods to disperse Aragalaya protesters, and reiterated how democracy had been saved and the economy rebuilt.

What was defeated was not Aragalaya as such. Aragalaya was a peaceful protest movement that emerged from people’s legitimate grievances and resentment. Some sinister political forces moved in, following an SLPP goon attack on the GoGota Gama protesters at Galle Face in May 2022, and used Aragalaya as a launch pad for a violent campaign. It was those violent characters and their supporters who were attacked and stopped near Parliament. Minister K. D. Lal Kantha has admitted that the JVP tried to capture Parliament but its efforts came a cropper. The SLPP government went on to disperse the  Aragalaya protesters at Galle Face. However, the JVP effectively tapped into public anger and rode to power on the crest of a massive wave of anti-politics.

What was expected of former Speaker Abeywardena on Thursday was not a narrative of the events that took place at the height of violent protests in 2022, but a statement naming those who sought to pressure him to violate the Constitution on 09 July 2022, when mobs tried to march on Parliament. What was witnessed in Colombo on that day has been described in some quarters as the culmination of a well-planned destabilisation process aimed at shaking this country off the sphere of influence of one world power and realigning it with another. If Parliament had fallen into the hands of violent protesters, the country would have been plunged into anarchy. Following the defeat of a no-faith motion against him in Parliament, on 21 March 2024, Abeywardena, who was the Speaker at the time, said after President Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s resignation, some external forces had asked him to take over as the President in violation of the Constitution. When he refused to do so, they had resorted to intimidation, he said, stressing that they were planning to turn Sri Lanka into another Libya. He disclosed that there had been some religious leaders among those who pressured him to grab the presidency. Thankfully, the armed forces and the police brought the situation under control, and Wickremesinghe became the President. The rest is history.

Abeywardena’s statement has confirmed what ousted President Gotabaya Rajapaksa and National Freedom Front Leader Wimal Weerawansa have said in their books on the 2022 uprising, its causes and fallout—The Conspiracy, and Nine: The Hidden Story, respectively. It has lent credence to the conspiracy theories about the 2022 uprising. Gotabaya has said in his book that his ouster in 2022 was due to an internationally-backed conspiracy. Weerawansa has argued that there was a foreign involvement in Aragalaya and accused the US of having used Aragalaya to compass its geopolitical ends. He was the first to reveal that some foreign governments had tried to railroad Speaker Abeywardena into taking over the presidency. His critics sought to dismiss his claim as a figment of his imagination. The US embassy in Colombo denied his claim at issue, calling his book a work of fiction.

Unfortunately, Abeywardena has not named those who strove to make him violate the Constitution. They committed a punishable offence. Theirs was obviously a conspiracy to install a puppet government and further their interests at the expense of this country. As we argued in a previous editorial comment, pressure must be brought to bear on former Speaker Abeywardena to respect the people’s right to know the foreign powers that conspired to have the Constitution of this country violated, and unleash anarchy.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.