Breaking the pattern in the name of travel:Different kind of guidebook

Speech by Dr SinhaRaja Tammita-Delgoda at the Launch of Around The World In Magnets – Sri Lanka by Anthony Vipin Das & Vidushi Duggal (Sarasavi, 2025). 16 October 2025 Colombo.

“We live in a wonderful world that is full of beauty, charm and adventure. There is no end to the adventures we can have if only we seek them with our eyes open.”

These are the words of India’s most famous traveller. He was a freedom fighter, a statesman, a writer and a thinker. He was Jawaharlal Nehru (1889 – 1964).

Nehru’s words capture the spirit behind this work, a love of travel and discovery. This shared love of travel led eye surgeon Dr. Anthony Vipin Das and writer and designer Vidushi Duggal to create a book on Sri Lanka for their own countrymen. Their idea attracted interest and support from different kinds of people and became bigger and bigger. That is why we are here today.

His Excellency Santosh Jha (Centre) with the Publishers, Patrons, Writers, and Speakers at the Launch

This is a different kind of guidebook, the 1st guidebook created for the Indian market by Indians. It is a well established opinion that Sri Lanka’s travel and tourism industry is reactive and derivative, never path breaking and never pro-active. We must commend Jetwing and  Ceylon Roots for breaking the pattern. They have been proactive, they have looked ahead and they have taken the initiative. Instead of waiting for things to happen, they have gone to the roots of the market and tried to shape it; instead of being bystanders, they have attempted to become participants and stakeholders.

Most of Indo-Lanka joint initiatives tend to be quite one way. In this case, these two companies have helped forge a genuinely collaborative, bi- lateral initiative, a joint Indo-Sri Lanka enterprise where both parties are stakeholders and participants. One now hopes that their expectations will be fulfilled and that this book will now travel widely through India.

Travel is a form of conversation, an interaction with places, buildings, peoples, history, philosophy, food, music and art. Guided and supported by Jetwing and Ceylon Roots, the authors have travelled widely and deeply. They have experienced and they have studied. But what is important is that they have listened, they have learned and they have understood.

Going well beyond the usual tourist sights and sounds, Dr Vipin and Vidushi have experienced many different aspects of life on the island and immersed themselves in its culture and environment. They have seen things and done things which would normally take several months. This has been made possible by careful planning and meticulous organization on the part of  Ceylon Roots and elegant hospitality by Jetwing. This speaker still remembers the curated, crafted, dinners which enriched our interaction in Kandy and made such a spectacular statement of style.

This journey has produced a narrative which is well written and accessible. It is detailed and informed. The authors have taken the time and the trouble to think, read and study. The end result is a much deeper, more knowledgeable experience of Sri Lanka in all its many forms and faces. It is enriched by feeling and sensitivity, driven by the desire to know and to absorb.

For so many people travel is just about being somewhere else, about doing and seeing something new. But if it is to really mean something, it is also about the ability to feel and listen to voices other than our own. Travel helps us understand how we see the world, it makes us think and feel differently, more deeply about what and who we are.

In 2007 the Irish author, priest, poet, and philosopher John O’Donohue (1956 – 2008) dedicated these words For the Traveler

Dr. Vipin Das and Vidushi Duggal have shown that they are much more than tourists, they are travellers.

Democrats sweep elections in New York, New Jersey, Virginia and California

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.