SLIC General Limited delivers strong financial performance in 2025

Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation General Limited (SLICGL) delivered a remarkable performance in 2025, reinforcing its position as Sri Lanka’s leading general insurer with outstanding results across key financial metrics. The company sustained a Gross Written Premium (GWP) of Rs. 30.3 billion, demonstrating the resilience of its diverse portfolio in a competitive and challenging environment.

SLICGL’s new business volume surged 51% to Rs. 12.5 billion, up from Rs. 8.3 billion in 2024, reflecting strong market demand, growing customer confidence, and the reach of the company’s distribution network. The company also paid out Rs. 12.3 billion in insurance claims and benefits, a 17% increase. These metrics reflect the impact of Cyclone Ditwah, and reaffirms SLICGL’s commitment of stability and reliability to policyholders and a clear demonstration of trust which has made SLICGL the nation’s first choice in risk protection.

Tax contribution to the Government at Rs. 5.7 billion, a 66% year-on-year increase, highlighted the scale of the company’s growth and contribution to national revenue. The company also expanded its overall market share to 20.2%, up from 19.4% in 2024, retaining its position as the undisputed market leader in Sri Lanka’s general insurance industry.

The motor insurance segment drove strong performance, with premium income growing 29.7% year-on-year, reinforcing Motor Plus’s position as the number one motor insurer in the country. Meanwhile, the non-motor segment, covering fire and engineering, marine, medical, and general accident lines grew 6.7%, outpacing the industry average and demonstrating resilience and breadth of SLICGL’s diversified portfolio. SLICGL further reinforced its financial standing through strategic investments, including Rs. 12.8 billion in government securities, showcasing the scale of the company’s asset base and active contribution to national economic stability.

Commenting on the performance, Dr Sameera Dharmasena, Chief Executive Officer stated, “SLICGL’s 2025 results demonstrate our ability to deliver sustained growth despite a challenging environment. Even in the aftermath of Cyclone Ditwah, we stood strong in terms of profitability, endorsing our prudent reinsurance management and disciplined strategy. SLICGL’s customer‑centric approach and operational excellence have reinforced our leadership position, and these achievements continue to reflect the trust placed in us by policyholders and the dedication of our teams.”

Mastercard strengthens Sri Lanka’s digital payments ecosystem with two major launches

DFCC Bank wins global award for Sri Lanka’s first Listed Blue Bond

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.