Sri Lankan firms seek partnerships at India’s EXCON 2025

The 13th edition of EXCON 2025, the world’s third-largest construction equipment exhibition organised by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), opened yesterday at the Bangalore International Exhibition Centre (BIEC), Bengaluru, and will conclude on 13 December.

The event also attracted two Sri Lankan companies, LAUGFS Rubber and OTR Enterprise Solutions, both exporters of tyres and steel rims for large-scale automobiles.

Both companies are looking to expand their presence by forming new partnerships in India to increase exports.

EXCON 2025 Co-Chairman Deepak Shetty said, “The construction equipment industry is committed to making India the second largest and fastest-growing construction equipment (CE) market globally, tripling its size to $ 25 billion and emerging as a global manufacturing and export hub.”

Currently, Indian CE products are exported to over 135 countries, including Sri Lanka.

CII President Designate and EXCON 2025 Chairman R. Mukundan said, “India is on a historic growth trajectory, aiming to become a $ 30 trillion economy by 2047, with infrastructure set to be the backbone of this transformation.”

“Mega projects like Bharatmala, high-speed rail, and Smart Cities under PM Gati Shakti are driving connectivity and urban development at an unprecedented scale.”

“The construction equipment industry is committed to making India the second largest and fastest-growing CE market globally, tripling its size to $ 25 billion and overtaking China to place second only to the United States.”

“As the nation moves toward its $ 30 trillion goal, EXCON, organised by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), will continue to empower stakeholders, foster collaboration, and drive modernisation, making it the epicentre of India’s infrastructure revolution,” added Mukundan.

CII Director General Chandrajit Banerjee said, “EXCON offers unparalleled opportunities for networking and collaboration. Spread across 3,500,000 sq. ft., the event will feature over 1,250 exhibitors, including participants from 20 countries and seven dedicated international pavilions, and unveiled more than 300 product launches.”

Recognised as a leading platform for introducing innovative vehicles and technologies, EXCON exemplifies the continued modernisation and dynamic growth of India’s construction ecosystem.