‘The Suspect Kolama’

There is no shortage of dog and pony shows in this country. They are usually staged by the government in power. The SJB-led Opposition has accused the incumbent NPP administration of creating high-profile events almost weekly to distract the public from its unfulfilled promises. The Opposition has chosen to call them Kolam (highly entertaining folk dance dramas).

Interestingly, among the traditional dance dramas is the Police Kolama. One may argue that the latest addition to them is the Suspect  Kolama, which was staged jointly by the police and the media at the BIA the other day upon the repatriation of a group of criminal suspects from Nepal, where they had been arrested.

Among the underworld figures, brought back from Nepal, was a key suspect in the killing of underworld kingpin Sanjeewa Samararatne aka  Ganemulle Sanjeewa inside a courtroom in Colombo, in February 2025. Ishara Sewwandi is her name. She is alleged to have disguised herself as a lawyer and smuggled a small firearm, concealed in a hollowed-out copy of the Criminal Procedure Code, into the court for the killing. Both the button man and Sewwandi made good their escape after the attack, but the former was subsequently arrested, and the latter went missing. It took months for the police to trace her.

The police have earned notoriety for swooping on children who commit minor offences, such as stealing a few coconuts, unable to dull the pangs of hunger, and hauling them up before court. But they were seen handling Sewwandi very gently the other day at the BIA. Her return also triggered a media feeding frenzy. It looked as if the police and the media had mistaken that female criminal suspect for an actress returning home after winning an international award. She looked amused at the manner in which she was being treated.

The police made a blunder in August, when several criminals including Manudinu Padmasiri Perera alias Kehelbaddara Padme were brought back from Indonesia. The Minister of Public Security, the IGP and several other senior police officers rushed to the BIA. Why should politicians and the police top brass be present at the BIA when Sri Lankan criminals arrested overseas are repatriated? The police and the government trotted out some excuses, which did not sound convincing at all.

The repatriation of dangerous criminals must be carried out very discreetly to ensure operational secrecy and prevent security risks. Local crime syndicates have amply demonstrated their ability to strike at will. One may recall that in 2023, an underworld gang planned a commando-style raid to spring a drug dealer named Nadun Wickremaratne alias Harak Kata from the CID headquarters, where he was being detained. Thankfully, their plan failed. It has been revealed that four serving army commandos were to take part in that abortive operation. A former army sniper was arrested in connection with the incident.

We reported last month that investigators had uncovered a plot by underworld kingpin Kehelbaddara Padme, who is Ishara Sewwandi’s boss, to kill Harak Kata by attacking a prison bus with a claymore mine. The plan came to light during the interrogation of a Sri Lanka Army Lieutenant Colonel, arrested for supplying weapons to a criminal known as Commando Salintha, who is Kehelbaddara Padme’s bodyguard. The officer reportedly admitted that Salintha had repeatedly called him, requesting Claymore mines. Investigators suspect that he may have supplied two such devices to Salintha.

For a gang that gunned down a powerful underworld figure inside a heavily guarded court complex in Colombo, attacking a prison bus on the road is child’s play. In 2017, a gang rivalry led to an underworld hit squad attacking a prison bus in Kalutara and killing five inmates including a notorious criminal, and two guards.

Besides eliminating their rivals, criminal gangs ‘whack’ their own members in police custody ‘before they can talk’. There have been instances where criminals were ‘iced’ in that manner as their bosses feared that they would squeal on their associates.

It is high time the police and their political masters did away with the Suspect Kolama and ensured the repatriation of criminals with utmost operational secrecy.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.