ComBank and Mastercard launch Sri Lanka’s first Dynamic Currency Conversion for online payments

As part of Commercial Bank of Ceylon’s sustained efforts to strengthen tourism-related businesses and improve convenience for foreign travellers, the Bank has partnered with Mastercard to introduce Sri Lanka’s first Dynamic Currency Conversion (DCC) capability for online payments, marking a significant milestone in the country’s digital payments landscape.

Enabled via the Mastercard Payment Gateway Services (MPGS) platform, the new DCC feature allows international cardholders making online purchases from Sri Lankan merchants and to pay in their home currency at checkout.

This first-of-its-kind capability for online payments in Sri Lanka is designed to help local merchants grow their business by making it easier for foreign travellers to book and pay online with confidence. By enabling Mastercard Payment Gateway Services (MPGS) with Dynamic Currency Conversion (DCC), Sri Lankan merchants, particularly in travel, hospitality and leisure can offer overseas customers a more transparent checkout experience when making reservations for flights, accommodation and related services.

DCC offers foreign cardholders the option to view and confirm the final transaction amount in their home currency before completing an online purchase, rather than being charged in Sri Lankan Rupees. The exchange rate and any associated fees are displayed upfront and processed in real time, removing uncertainty caused by fluctuating exchange rates or unexpected charges after the transaction is completed.

The solution is delivered in collaboration with global DCC provider FEXCO, with Euronet Worldwide providing the advanced switching and processing infrastructure that supports real-time currency conversion, transaction processing, clearing and settlement. Together, the partners enable a seamless, transparent and secure payment experience for cross-border online transactions, extending a capability that Commercial Bank has successfully offered for point-of-sale and in-store payments since 2019, into the fast-growing e-commerce space.

Commenting on this latest milestone, Sanath Manatunge, Managing Director/CEO of Commercial Bank said: “We have always been at the forefront of digital innovation, and introducing Sri Lanka’s first Dynamic Currency Conversion service for the Mastercard Payment Gateway is a testament to our commitment to merchants and the national economy. This collaboration with Mastercard enables us to offer our merchant base a competitive advantage, a new revenue stream, and a world-class payment experience that is transparent and convenient for every international shopper. This is a crucial step in supporting Sri Lanka’s drive to attract more digital foreign revenue and promote tourism.”

Sandun Hapugoda, Country Manager, Sri Lanka and Maldives at Mastercard, said: “Mastercard congratulates Commercial Bank of Ceylon for pioneering this milestone. The introduction of DCC brings global payment best practices to Sri Lanka, empowering international cardholders with choice and transparency when making payments. The bank has fully leveraged MPGS capabilities, including advanced features like Transaction Risk Management (TRM). MPGS serves as a versatile solution for merchants of all sizes, from small businesses to complex models such as payment aggregators and facilitators. This achievement is the result of seamless collaboration and technology integration with partners like FEXCO and Euronet, making this much-needed solution a reality for the market.”

The launch of DCC for online payments further reinforces Commercial Bank’s leadership in digital payments. The Bank was the first local bank to introduce MPGS in Sri Lanka in 2007 and today supports a large and diverse merchant base with the ability to accept online payments globally. Commercial Bank currently facilitates multi-currency transactions in more than 10 international currencies and provides built-in fraud monitoring within MPGS to ensure high standards of security and trust for merchants and customers alike.

By extending DCC to online payments, the Bank enables Sri Lankan merchants to deliver a world-class checkout experience comparable to global e-commerce standards, while giving international customers clarity over costs and greater control over how they pay.

The first Sri Lankan bank with a market capitalisation exceeding US$ 1 Bn., Commercial Bank was also the first bank in the country to be listed among the Top 1000 Banks of the World, and has the highest Tier I capital base among all Sri Lankan banks. The Bank is the largest private sector lender in Sri Lanka and the largest lender to the country’s SME sector. Commercial Bank is also a leader in digital innovation and is Sri Lanka’s first 100% carbon-neutral bank.

CIPM Sri Lanka to host strategic workshop on sustainable performance management for organisational resilience

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.