Indo-Lanka Chamber hosts dialogue on Sri Lanka’s investment future

The Indo-Lanka Chamber of Commerce & Industry (ILCCI), affiliated to The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, hosted an interactive session on ‘Sri Lanka’s Investment Future: Policy, Opportunity & Growth’ at Jetwing Colombo Seven.

The session was attended by Dr. Satyanjal Pandey as Chief Guest, while Aritha Wickramasinghe delivered the keynote address in his capacity asChief of Staff to the Office of the Presidential Special Envoy on Foreign Investment, Hanif Yusoof.

ILCCI President M. Raghuraman, in his remarks, expressed appreciation to Dr. Pandey for his service during his tenure in Sri Lanka and underscored the timeliness and importance of the session topic in the context of the current global economic and geopolitical climate.

Addressing the gathering, Dr. Pandey observed that in a period marked by geopolitical and economic turbulence - reliability, trustworthiness, and secure supply chains have become increasingly important. He also highlighted the strong and growing economic partnership between India and Sri Lanka, noting several significant Indian investments in Sri Lanka, including those by ITC Limited and CEAT Limited, while indicating that further investments are expected in the future.

As a representative of the state, Aritha Wickramasinghe stated that it is the responsibility of the government to ensure that, even amid global turbulence, Sri Lanka remains stable in its policy direction, credible in its economic management, and consistent in its engagement with investors. He also emphasised the opportunities available to the Sri Lankan economy through deeper engagement with India’s fast-growing economy, noting that while India and Sri Lanka are neighbours, the relationship is regarded as one of family rather than mere proximity.

The session which included a highly engaging and interactive Q&A session with the audience, concluded with a productive exchange of views between the distinguished guests, speakers and participants, reaffirming the importance of continued dialogue and collaboration in strengthening investment and economic ties between Sri Lanka and India.