Sri Lanka says distressed and concerned over Israeli footage of detained flotilla activists

In an unusual move, Israel joins world in rebuking Israeli Minister for posting videos of himself taunting activists kneeling with their hands tied behind their backs

The Government of Sri Lanka yesterday expressed deep concern and profound distress over footage posted by Israeli Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir which reportedly depicted the dehumanising treatment of detainees linked to the “Global Sumud Flotilla”.

In a statement, the Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Ministry said it was engaging with the Israeli Foreign Ministry through diplomatic channels to secure immediate consular access to a Sri Lankan national Sameera Mehboobdeen who was a medic in one of the vessels and was detained.

The Ministry said discussions were also underway to obtain assurances regarding the individual’s safety, wellbeing, and dignity while in custody.

It further stated that efforts were continuing to ensure the swift and safe repatriation of the Sri Lankan national to Sri Lanka.

“The Government remains fully committed to the protection and welfare of Sri Lankan citizens abroad,” the Ministry said.

The statement follows growing international attention over the reported interception of the Gaza-bound “Global Sumud Flotilla” by Israeli authorities and the subsequent detention of several individuals associated with the mission.

According to the BBC, there has been international condemnation of Israel’s treatment of pro-Palestinian activists who were on board a Gaza-bound aid flotilla intercepted by Israeli naval forces.

The US, the UK, France, Italy and Canada were among the countries which expressed outrage after far-right National Security Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir posted a video showing himself taunting activists kneeling with their hands tied behind their backs.

His actions also drew rare criticism from Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who said they were “not in line with Israel’s values”.

The US ambassador to Israel, Mike Huckabee, called Ben-Gvir’s actions “despicable”.

UK Foreign Secretary Yvette Cooper said the video showed “totally disgraceful scenes”, adding that she had sent a summons to the Israeli embassy to demand an “urgent explanation”.

She earlier said the government was “in touch with the families of a number of British nationals involved to provide them with consular support”.

In an unusual step, Israel’s Foreign Minister joined the condemnation of his cabinet colleague.

Addressing him on X, Gideon Saar wrote: “You knowingly caused harm to our state in this disgraceful display - and not for the first time.”

Ben-Gvir hit back swiftly, saying: “The Foreign Minister is expected to understand that Israel has stopped being a pushover.”

“Israel has every right to prevent provocative flotillas of Hamas terrorist supporters from entering our territorial waters and reaching Gaza,” a statement said. “However, the way that Minister Ben-Gvir dealt with the flotilla activists is not in line with Israel’s values and norms.”

The Prime Minister added that he had instructed Israeli authorities to “deport the provocateurs as soon as possible”.

A rights group representing the detainees said they had been physically abused, resulting in “severe, widespread injuries”.

Adalah said at least three people had been taken to hospital and were later discharged.

“[Adalah’s] lawyers documented dozens of participants with suspected broken ribs and resulting difficulty in breathing,” it said.

“Reports also indicated the frequent use of Tasers against participants, as well as injuries sustained from the use of rubber bullets during the interception...

The group said activists were also “subjected to severe degradation and sexual harassment and humiliation”.

Canadian Prime Minister Mark Carney has described Israel’s treatment of the activists as “abominable”, adding that he had instructed officials to summon the Israeli ambassador.

“The protection of civilians and respect for human dignity must be upheld everywhere, at all times,” Carney said in a post on X.

Australian Foreign Minister Penny Wong condemned Ben-Gvir, saying that the actions of Israeli authorities were “degrading”.

Australia, Italy, France, the Netherlands, Belgium and Spain said Ben-Gvir’s actions were “unacceptable” and that they had summoned their respective Israeli ambassadors.

Irish Foreign Minister Helen McEntee said the footage showed that “illegally detained participants”, including Irish citizens, were “not in any way being treated with appropriate dignity or respect”.