Temporary procedure introduced for Police clearance report

Colombo, August 21 (Daily MIrror) - The Sri Lanka Police has introduced a temporary procedure for Police Clearance Report applications following an unexpected technical failure affecting the computerized system of the Police Clearance Division.

The Police said the system, operated by the Police Clearance Division on the 17th floor of the Suhurupaya Building in Battaramulla, has been inactive since noon on August 20, 2026. The system is used to process applications, obtain background reports and print Police Clearance Certificates.

While technical teams are working to restore the system, applicants have been instructed to use a temporary application process.

Applicants should visit the official Sri Lanka Police website, www.police.lk, select “Download Application” and complete the relevant form. The completed application, together with copies of the applicant’s National Identity Card and passport, should then be emailed to [email protected].

The police said applicants are not required to make any payment at this initial stage.

However, once the computerized system is restored, all applicants who use the temporary procedure will be required to submit their applications again through the online system and make the applicable payment in accordance with the normal procedure.

Meanwhile, applicants who submitted their documents before the system failure will be able to check whether their certificates are ready for collection. Reference numbers of completed certificates will be published on the official Sri Lanka Police website.

Applicants whose reference numbers are published can collect their Police Clearance Certificates in person from the 17th floor of the Suhurupaya Building. As a special arrangement, collection services will also be available on Saturdays and Sundays.

Applicants whose reference numbers have not been published will receive their reports after the computerized system has been fully restored.