Adikted enters Colombo’s food scene

Adikted has now opened the doors to its flagship outlet on 262, Nawala Road, Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte.

The newest addition to Colombo’s food scene takes on all the hallmarks of street food and combines it with bold flavours to offer a delectable food experience.

Brought to you by the entrepreneurs who began the popular homegrown food chain, Street Burger, the team behind Adikted are no strangers to Sri Lanka’s food circuit. Street Burger arrived onto Colombo’s food scene in 2016 from humble beginnings with a popular food truck along Marine Drive that drew large crowds for its flavourful burgers and subsequently expanded to restaurants to cater to the growing demand for its unique take on gourmet burgers spiced with a Sri Lankan touch.

Like Street Burger, Adikted is designed to be scalable and run as a franchise.

“Adikted began as an idea to offer fresh gourmet burgers at affordable pricing and is a concept that has been many years in the making. What marks it is its emphasis on speed and affordability without compromising on quality. We have spent years perfecting the menu and bring in a decade of experience along with a dedication to build and augment Sri Lanka’s food culture,” said Tharique Shibly, co-founder of Adikted and Street Burger.

“With fresh ingredients that are sourced daily and with every item made to order, food lovers in Colombo can expect a casual but elevated dining experience. Adikted is built for the discerning foodie who is quick to recognize good food when they see it and customers who yearn for quick, hearty meals that are high on flavour and devoid of frills and short cuts,” said Masoon Samoon, co-founder of Adikted and Street Burger

Adikted’s menu focuses on crispy chicken burgers as well as submarines, with vegetarian offerings, and sides such as loaded fries and nuggets and a variety of beverages to wash everything down. Its flagship outlet on Nawala Road consists of a large dining space and is open for extended hours.