Civil society group urges CIABOC to avoid ‘media spectacles’ and protect independence

The Dinana Dakuna Collective has written to the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC), urging the anti-graft body to safeguard its independence, credibility and impartiality amid growing public scrutiny over its conduct in high-profile investigations.

In a letter signed by Collective Leadership Board members Attorney Shiral Lakthilaka, President’s Counsel Maithri Gunaratne and Nadeesha de Silva, the group said public confidence in the Commission could be undermined if investigations are not conducted impartially and transparently.

The collective also cautioned CIABOC against actions that could be perceived as “media spectacles”, particularly when summoning individuals and issuing public statements on ongoing investigations.

The letter stressed that the Commission, established under the Anti-Corruption Act as an independent institution, has a responsibility to demonstrate neutrality and maintain public trust while pursuing corruption-related probes.

“The aim of this commission is to make it a strong institution through the Anti-Corruption Act and eradicate fraud, corruption and waste in our country.

As it currently stands, various opinions have been formed in society and the media regarding the functioning of this commission. The Dinana Dakuna Collective believes that it is not appropriate for an independent council.

If the Commission fails to ensure that complaints are investigated impartially, it will pose a serious threat to the dignity and credibility of the Commission, an important independent institution in our country.

We believe that it is the duty and responsibility of you, the members of the Commission and all officers, including yourself, to protect the dignity, independence, transparency and impartiality of this institution.

The Dinana Dakuna Collective would like to emphasize that when issuing statements in relation to any investigation conducted by the Commission or when summoning relevant parties and recording their statements, you can demonstrate your independence to society by ensuring that you do not act in a way that could be portrayed by certain groups as mere media spectacles”.