Weighing Foreign Assistance in a Disaster Prone Country

Sri Lankans have been watching, first with gratitude and appreciation, the wave of foreign assistance coming into Sri Lanka in the wake of the cyclone Ditwah calamity. However now, more and more, there is caution being aired on the quality and thrust of the foreign assistance and possible negative impact on the local population at a time when the government appears to be moving from donations to investment.

One problem is that the official press releases never clarify that the funds pledged by the multilateral banks (IMF,World Bank, ADB) are usually not new funds but unused credits repurposed and these are in fact loans and not interest free either. Even as the lender of last resort, IMF Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) responds positively to the Sri Lanka Government request for a new $200 million loan, Verite Research warns that the effective cost of the RFI financing could exceed 6%. Although few may be aware, throughout the period of Sri Lanka’s “bankruptcy” this country has continued to pay interest due on loans from multilateral banks, this being a condition of the IMF programme. Bilateral bank to bank swaps and loans have also been paid back upon request, although there is a Chinese currency swap of RMB 10 billion (around US$1.4 billion) which has been supporting our foreign reserves for some time.

It should however be noted that some of the foreign assistance initiatives are just in bad taste at this time – like the current Australian push assisted by naïve local think tanks and academics, for mechanized mining of Sri Lanka’s mineral assets in the name of “Growth”. Are these local think tanks and academics following the Trump theory that the climate crisis doesn’t exist? They should just look around what has happened in this island on account of cyclone Ditwah, the unprecedented rainfall bringing down some 10% of annual rainfall in just 24 hours some calling it a “hydrological red alert” which is shifting the balance in nature and may become more common in the future.

The problem is that these mineral assets which the foreign companies want to exploit, are in environmentally sensitive areas and the cyclone recovery must rightly focus at this time not on extraction but on saving the land from future unplanned development, soil health, reforesting as a means of stabilizing collapsing hillsides and river banks, safe water etc.

“Mannar is a prime example because ,beneath its sands lie vast reserves of ilmenite, rutile and zircon, minerals coveted by global industries for titanium, aerospace and ceramics. Companies such as Australia’s Titanium Sands Limited have aggressively pursued extraction projects while local environmental scientists warn that mining in Mannar could deplete freshwater aquifers worsening chronic water scarcity, destroy sea grass beds and coral reefs undermining fisheries, vital to 15,000 families and accelerate coastal erosion, increasing vulnerability to climate disasters.

“Mannar is not just another island. Its sand dunes, mangroves, saline wetlands and pristine beaches form natural barriers against climate change and coastal erosion. Freshwater bodies such as Korakulam Lake sustain migratory birds along the Central Asian Flyway including flamingos and pelicans while its sea grass beds and coral reefs support thousands of fisher families. The island is also a cultural stronghold. Tamil and Muslim communities have lived here for generations, preserving livelihoods tied to the land and sea. For them, mining is not merely an environmental issue; it is an existential threat to their traditions, food security and future.” (internet sources)

On account of these large scale wind and sand mining projects, since early 2024, Mannar has witnessed some of the largest environmental protests in Sri Lanka’s recent history, uniting communities, faith leaders and civil society in unprecedented fashion. In October this year a fundamental rights petition was filed in the Supreme Court challenging the proposed heavy mineral sand extraction project on Mannar Island seeking an order suspending the operation of the Terms of Reference (TOR) and the licence issued for mining activities in the Mannar area.

The next court date is in February 2026 perhaps that is why the Australian side is now redoubling its support to the Australian mining companies! But will failed public diplomacy result in slowing down the protests or will it spur them on? Journalists should be aware of the complexity of the issues in Mannar and reflect all sides instead of just reporting on seminars and press briefings by one plainly well-endowed party.

India, which is an invaluable first responder to neighbourhood natural disasters, is sadly also falling prey to these local suspicions partly because of controversies arising from large scale investment projects such as by the Adani group in Mannar and for the East Coast where it seems large tracts of land have been identified for a similar purpose. Editorials in newspapers picking up from the growing public discontent, are now recalling episodes of interference by Indian diplomats in local politics in Sri Lanka and calling for New Delhi to “cultivate and develop cordial relations with the island without playing politics”.

India is also now a major manufacturer of pharmaceuticals and their efforts to promote exports are running into controversies in the region. In Sri Lanka protests are escalating on account of recent acceptance of Indian standards (pharmacopia) at a time when contaminated imported vaccines and injections have been found in Sri Lanka public hospitals. Less known and perhaps more of concern, is that India is also now a leading manufacturer of defence equipment and is pushing its products through bilateral defence agreements such as the Dornier aircraft, which package comes with the embedding of Indian security personnel ostensibly for “training” and “maintenance”. How do we balance bilateral assistance and investment needs and still ensure that Sri Lanka maintains its sovereignty and independence?

One way the press can help is by exposing the underlying conditions of multilateral and bilateral agreements. In any analysis of the different flows of foreign assistance into Sri Lanka, there is a need to highlight the direct cash transfers which support the Treasury and are the most valuable for the government. Remittances received from expatriates fall into this category and the newspapers carry countless stories of our local heroes who have been in the forefront of raising assistance for Sri Lanka. A number of countries even small neighbours like Maldives, Nepal and Bhutan have also provided direct donations to the Sri Lanka Government.

During the tsunami crisis the then head of the Treasury appreciated the Swiss Cash for Housing project which funds went through the Treasury to the local bank administering the project and only one Swiss official was posted to the Treasury to oversee its proper administration. However, the major foreign governments typically donate through UN agencies like WHO, UNICEF (this is then counted as part of their assistance to those agencies as well) which carry sizable administrative costs and leave less for actual benefit to affected people on the ground.

Of late, local television has been presenting short films on television of the good results shown through the transfer of technology from China and Japan as implemented and described by local counterparts in areas such as water purification and hillside stabilization. The financial conditions of such transfer of technology are not mentioned, but it is so much better public diplomacy.

(Sarala Fernando retired from the Foreign Ministry as Additional Secretary; her last ambassadorial appointment was as Permanent Representative to the UN and International Organizations in Geneva . Her Ph.D was on India-Sri Lanka relations and she works now on foreign policy, public diplomacy and protection of heritage).

A question of “culling” surplus cattle in govt. farms & handling appeals

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.