Seventh consecutive Overall Excellence win for LOLC Finance at LankaPay Technnovation Awards 2026

LOLC Finance PLC, Sri Lanka’s largest Non-Banking Financial Institution (NBFI), has reaffirmed its leadership in digital financial services, with its flagship platform iPay securing the Gold Award for Overall Excellence in Digital Payments for the seventh consecutive year at the LankaPay Technnovation Awards 2026.

The awards ceremony, held on 24th March 2026 at Cinnamon Life City of Dreams, Colombo, recognised LOLC Finance’s commitment to a secure, customer-centric digital ecosystem. At its core, iPay continues to enable seamless financial interactions for individuals and businesses, redefining digital payments.

Further demonstrating its digital strength, LOLC Finance was recognised across multiple categories.

Overall Excellence in Digital Payments (Non-Bank Financial Institution) – Gold Award

Best Digital Payment Application for Retail Payments of the Year (Bank and Non-Bank Financial Institutions) – Gold Award

Best LankaSign Digital Signature Enabler of the Year – Gold Award

Best Digital Government Payments Enabler of the Year (Non-Bank Financial Institutions) – Gold Award

Best Cross-Border Transactions Enabler of the Year – Silver Award

Most Popular Digital Payment Solution of the Year (Medium & Small Bank and Non-Bank Financial Institution) – Merit Award

iPay continues to lead the market with over 50% JustPay market share, more than 1.2 million downloads, and over 1.8 million transactions processed monthly. Its evolution from a payment app into a fully integrated lifestyle platform enables users to manage daily financial needs from merchant payments and fund transfers to utility bill settlements and government payments enhancing convenience while advancing financial inclusion.

Extending its impact beyond consumers, iPay Business empowers SMEs and MSMEs with a comprehensive suite of digital solutions. It supports LankaQR, card, foreign, and bill payment acceptance, along with secure internet payment gateways. Enhanced with tools such as iAds and marketplace features, and upcoming capabilities including booking management systems, inventory management, basic HR, and integrated accounting, iPay Business is positioned as a holistic growth partner.

Hasitha Leanage and Hugh Terry as Independent Non Executive Directors

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.