Mothers of a different kind

Reading and then writing a comment on Arundathi Roy’s Mother Mary comes to me, I was preoccupied with the sheer wickedness of Arundathi’s mother as described by her. How could a mother be so nasty, mean, and demeaning in comment to her little daughter? True, she resented her; had tried aborting her because she was unhappy in her marriage, but to go to such lengths to make the young girl so very unhappy. She never seemed to make allowance for her daughter being blameless and so innocent, and her plight being solely hers.

My usual group of female friends sat together and discussed this matter. The info that was forthcoming was not only surprising but perturbing. One could hardly believe that mothers as described by one or two friends were actual and in Sri Lanka where good motherhood is universal, or so I thought.

What is the concept of a mother that we hold? She is so loving, caring and often self-sacrificing. Do you remember the film Yashorawaya where Iranganie Serasinghe played mother to the family in which Richard de Zoysa was eldest son? In one scene he comes to the kitchen after the family has had their dinner and sees his mother scrape the pot of rice for dankuda – scraps that were left in the pot. That was her meal; so long as her husband and children had full plates of rice and curry.

My memory of my mother was that she managed the household and expenses after my father died when I was five years old with a brother and three sisters. She had to visit her village often to get money from tea sold from her land, and rice etc, This was after grandfather died too. So pampering and bestowing me with love and indulgence fell to my eldest sister who was totally very kind. Memory shoots forwards. I had my first child. I could not sleep soundly that night, only in bits as I was so happy having a perfect baby. When my second was placed soon after birth on my chest, I had such a strong intention to do all I could to make this infant a happy, healthy boy. Later, after my husband and I gave them the best life possible, we let them go out to the world to make their own lives with no clinging from us.

That is personal but usual among all mothers except the very few who are the exceptions. We who consider ourselves normal cannot fathom how mothers could be to their children with selfishness at heart.

I know of a mother who was different. She had two daughters and did not want them married which meant moving away from her and starting their own lives – married and ready to build homes of their own. The eldest rebelled and married: eloping with a very suitable man. She was banned from visiting the mother and her spinster sister. Spinsterthood was thrust on the youngest daughter by her mother. It was most definitely due to the selfishness of the mother and her thinking only of her own welfare. There are plenty mothers who give their daughters in marriage but do not approve of, or make any positive moves, to getting sons married. These selfish mothers are frequenter than the former. Very few mothers want to keep their children, least of all daughters, deprived of lives of their own.

A very artistic mother who was also very beautiful, had a daughter who, growing up, promised to be even better looking than her mother. Can you believe that the mother was obviously jealous of the daughter and insulted and bullied her? Retaliation by either daughter or father was impossible because this woman walked a tight rope between mental well-being and nervous breakdowns. I do not know how it all ended since I lost touch with the artist and did not want to find out either.

There are mothers who are often sadistic towards their daughters. Their bouts of slapping or doing worse to their little daughters occurring whenever they are unable to contain themselves. These have a grudge against husbands, their family members or life itself, and take it out on poor innocent kids who are unable to protect themselves. It is very disturbing to know that a few women teachers are thus. My three wheeler friend had the unfortunate experience of having his younger son slapped and even injured below one eye by his class teacher.

He complained to the Principal who said he was powerless to reprove her as she had political backing. I told the father I would accompany him to the Child Protection authorities to make a complaint. Fortunately, it all eased naturally: the child was transferred to a parallel Grade 3 Class. This was about seven years previous. Now with the ban of capital punishment in schools and education reforms in the offing, such very troubling incidents against school kids will be reduced, if not hopefully eliminated.

Worse was narrated by a friend in our group who said a colleague suffered having her mother living with them since the mother was forever trying to catch the attention of her son-in-law. The climax was that one late evening, just before bedtime for the household, this mother cut a circle off her dressing gown down below her waist and called out to the son-in-law. The daughter answered the mother. She was confined to her room and a doctor summoned. A sleeping pill and later psychiatric treatment remedied the mother. Here again it was the mother not accepting her role and giving way to latent sexual desires.

Many such sad stories continue. But this is disturbing enough for one Sunday morning!! Curious, I googled to find out whether any Hollywood or British film actors had suffered Arundhati Roy’s mother-illtreated-childhood. Many were the confessions of women stars against their fathers who they accused of abusing them, mostly sexually. Happily I found almost nothing about ill treatment by mothers.

I quote what I retrieved: “While no celebrities are listed as being ill-treated by their mothers, Drew Barrymore had an estranged relationship with her mother, due to her mother’s actions during her childhood, though Barrymore continued to support her. Also mentions Eminem’s apology to his mother after years of public insults, suggesting complex and sometimes negative interactions between celebrities and their parents”

I remember listening to a public lecture by a well known author who blamed his mother for a very disturbed childhood as his friends jibed that his mother was sleeping with various men. Here was a case of a mother’s unbridled sex urge harming her son.

That is enough! Thank goodness we and most women of Sri Lanka are ‘normal’ as mothers- the usual most loving, caring mothers whose total concern is the very best for their children.

Sri Lanka’s Battle Against Tobacco: Progress, Setbacks, and the Road Ahead

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.