Ajay Kamalakaran’s “Colombo: Port of Call”

Ajay Kamalakaran’s Colombo: Port of Call is a book about travel and discovery. It is about the joy of discovery and the dreariness of disillusionment. It is about how the beliefs that shape us influence how we see another society, another world.

The book contains 14 chapters and relates accounts from 14 travellers. It tries to imagine a world and a country far removed from our own. In doing so, it tries to bring that world, and that time, closer to ours. To quote the author himself:

“The essays in this book look to capture Colombo and Sri Lanka through the eyes of those who visited the island in the heyday of ocean travel.”

This was a time when ocean travel was the only mode of transport between countries, when one had to endure weeks, sometimes months of travel to get to one’s destination.

To those who have read him in Sri Lanka, Ajay Kamalakaran is not an unfamiliar name. He has been writing so much about Sri Lanka that, as he puts it in the introduction to this wonderfully evocative book, Sri Lanka has become “a home away from home” and Colombo a “final destination” and a  “base.”

It may surprise first-time readers that Colombo: Port of Call is not really about Colombo or its Port of Call at all. The port and the city are just transit points, and they set the stage for the many journeys that follow. Described very evocatively, these journeys all add up to a narrative that flows from one traveller to another.

The beauty of Ajay’s book is that while there is very little which these men and women share with each other, they are all bonded together by a common love for new experiences. Depending on how high their expectations are, these men and women return from Sri Lanka, and from all the places they have been to, with great joy or utter disenchantment.

Traveller’s books and guides are a dime a dozen. They come and go. Colombo: Port of Call is a book which steers clear of this subcategory. What Ajay does is to get us into the shoes of the people he describes. He gets us to see Sri Lanka through their eyes, through the filters of their beliefs and biases. Indeed, there are certain points when we laugh at, and points when we are humbled by, the impressions of these men and women.

Hans Christian Anderson, the great teller of fairy tales, whose flights of fancy animated our childhoods, has this to say about travel in his autobiography.

The point that travel is not an abstract state of mind, but a way of life and a way of seeing other cultures, other societies, other people.

Hirun Matheesha studies law at Sri Lanka Law College and management at the University of Colombo. Having completed his secondary education at Royal College, he did his A Levels in 2023, served as a prefect, and co-edited the flagship publication there, The Royalist, in 2024. Since leaving school in 2025 he has been involved in multiple projects, involving biographies of prominent people and histories of public institutions. Most of these projects have been with Uditha Devapriya. Hirun and Uditha are now co-writing a biography of a prominent Sri Lankan entrepreneur. He can be reached at hirun.m13@gmail.com.

Internal conflicts in SLFP under MR presidency and crossovers from UNP

More about President Premadasa – his caring nature & lack of trust in people

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.