Emirates and SLTPB renew tourism partnership

The renewal of the partnership between Emirates and the Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau.

Emirates and the Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau (SLTPB) have renewed their partnership to amplify efforts aimed at benefiting the country’s tourism industry.

The world’s largest international airline, which flies to almost 140 destinations, continues to draw on its vast network spanning six continents to promote the destination’s offerings to global audiences and support the growth of tourist arrivals.

The partnership was formalised through a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the two parties and aims to build on the successes of previous years, since it was first established in 2022, with Emirates consistently contributing to tourism arrivals to the nation.  At Arabian Travel Market 2026, the MoU was signed by Essa Sulaiman Ahmad, Emirates’ Senior Vice President of Commercial West Asia & Indian Ocean and Chamila Jayarathna, Deputy Managing Director – Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau.

The signing ceremony was also attended by Arusha Cooray – Ambassador of Sri Lanka in UAE, Alexi Gunasekera - Consul General of Sri Lanka and Madusha Perera, Deputy Director – Marketing – SLTPB, in addition to other representatives of the airline and tourism bodies.

The renewed MoU reinforces the successful partnership between Emirates and SLTPB, which together promote Sri Lanka as a destination to key markets within Emirates’ network. Top markets in Emirates’ vast network spanning six continents and contributing to the tourist arrivals by air include Russia, UK, Germany, Australia and the US, among others.

Emirates’ Senior Vice President, Commercial West Asia & Indian Ocean Essa Sulaiman Ahmad said, “Sri Lanka is among the longest-standing destinations in our network, having served it for over 40 years now, and we are proud to continue to work hand in hand with its tourism authority to contribute to its success as a top tourist destination. We continue to dedicate substantial efforts to contribute to the success of the nation’s tourism industry.