Cardinal condemns planned sexual education curriculum, warns of foreign influence

Archbishop of Colombo Malcolm Cardinal Ranjith has raised alarm over what he described as an “inappropriate sexual education program” being developed for inclusion in the country’s school curriculum next year, warning that it threatens to erode Sri Lanka’s cultural and moral values.

Speaking at the reopening ceremony of the renovated St. Stephen’s Church in Meerigama–Kinadeniya on Saturday, Cardinal Ranjith criticised the proposed education reforms scheduled to begin in January 2026, alleging that the sexual education component is being introduced under the influence of international organisations.

He claimed that the new curriculum seeks to introduce lessons on sexual education from Grade 6, supported by teacher training and seminars, and questioned the Government’s intentions behind the move.

“Is this really education? Isn’t it the parents’ responsibility to teach such matters to their children at the right time?” he asked.

The Cardinal further alleged that the program includes content on same-sex relationships and birth control, and accused foreign entities such as the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) of funding and guiding the initiative.

“They have given money to the government and the Education Ministry, printed books, and are now implementing a plan that misleads our children,” he said.

Warning that the program is expected to commence on 27 January, he said it could undermine Sri Lanka’s cultural and religious foundations.

“This is an attempt to destroy our children. They are trying to bring the values of a decayed Western world that has lost religion and morality into our country,” he cautioned.

The Cardinal urged the Government and the President to intervene immediately and halt the implementation of the proposed lessons.

“If the Ministry of Education is acting in ways that lead innocent children astray, we must completely reject it,” he said, reiterating his objection to the initiative.