Wijetunga calls a general election and my first time in Parliament

During my discussions with the President it became clear that he would like to have Ronnie de Mel in his Cabinet. Since they were together in the JRJ Cabinet he had great respect for the then Finance Minister. Ronnie had gone into hibernation during the Premadasa regime. There was not much love lost between the two because as Finance Minister Ronnie was constantly rejecting the former’s requests for more money to spend on social welfare measures which would have wrecked the fiscal discipline of his budget but enhanced the Prime Minister’s image.

There were many arguments in Cabinet about allocations for competing ministries and Premadasa’s famous wrath was visited on Ronnie who did not contest the Parliamentary election in 1989. He supported the DUNF but did not take membership. His wife Mallika however became a member and was an enthusiastic supporter of the party in the south. At Wijetunga’s request I appealed to Ronnie who after a spell in the UK had come back and was watching the evolving political situation with great interest.

I had several meetings with Ronnie at his home in Charles Drive and he agreed to join Wijetunga and the UNP since his “bete noir” Premadasa had left the scene. With Anura and Gamini on his side Wijetunga was trying to add to his winning streak by inducting Ronnie amid much appreciation from the party and the media as a unifier after the inter party conflicts which marked the earlier regime. He also recruited Rajitha Senaratne who had left Vijaya-Chandrika’s Mahajana Party after it decided to ally itself with the revitalized SLFP, now virtually led by its former chief CBK.

Again the question of creating a slot in the national list arose, this time for Ronnie. Again the sitting members were playing hard to get. However after much effort one was found who was willing to resign for both love and money. A house in Colombo and a substantial sum of money were the change agents and Ronnie took his place as Minister of Shipping in the Wijetunga Cabinet.

We at Lake House had all the inside information and we could scoop the other newspapers in hot political news. At this time I hit a home run as I was familiar with Ronnie’s life long habit of an early morning walk on Galle Face green. A few days before he crossed over I sent a Lake House photographer to take a shot of him walking briskly on the marina in Galle Face. We carried it on the front page and the whole country knew that some political shift was about to take place. However he could not function for a long time because Wijetunga went in prematurely for a general election. The lucky national list MP who “sacrificed” his seat for Ronnie laughed all the way to the Bank.

I was at Mihintale participating in the annual Poson festival sponsored by Lake House when I got the news that the President had decided to dissolve Parliament and go for a Parliamentary election. When I asked him about it he told me to go discuss it with Tilak Marapone who had strongly supported that decision. I drove to Tilalk’s house at Nugegoda and he told me that there was no point in discussing it further as the draft gazette notification was already with the Government Printer.

We were now in the cusp of a general election. I was told that Wijetunga had decided against holding a Presidential election because Mrs. Bandaranaike would be his opponent. He was not sure of the support of the UNP Members of Parliament who had by now split into different camps after the induction of Gamini who, in spite of his valiant efforts to woo Ranil, was yet to win the approval of the Ranil camp. For instance Gamini told me that the Chief Minister of Central Province Dissanayaka had pledged to sabotage his election campaign as he had decided to leave Nuwara Eliya and contest the Kandy district which was the latter’s bailiwick

At the same time Hameed was unhappy that his place in the Kandy district was under threat from Gamini and me. He did not like my strength in Harispattuwa electorate where I had strong family connections. He was threatening Wijetunga that he would contest an electorate in Eastern province from the newly minted Muslim Congress which he was supporting surreptitiously. Simultaneously he was requesting me to shift to the adjoining Galagedera seat which had the smallest number of voters as compared to Harispattuwa electorate which had the highest number.

In his own interest he was aligned with Ranil and later became his mentor. Ranil reciprocated by making him the Chairman of the UNP under his watch. Another reason for Wijetunga’s hesitation in contesting the Presidency was that he had alienated the minorities. He had offended the Muslims in his speeches where he compared them to “creepers on the big tree of the Sinhala community”. He meant well thereby to show their interdependence but the media gave it a different spin and he was portrayed as a Sinhala racist.

It did not help when the Sinhala extremists began to praise him for his sectarianism which marked him out from JR and Premadasa. Wijetunga and Ranil did not bother to cultivate Ashraff as Premadasa had done and this had many serious consequences for the UNP later on. On the other hand Chandrika became the favourite of the minorities and was able to gather votes from a constituency which had earlier voted against the SLFP. Neelan Tiruchelvam told me that S. Nadesan, the famous progressive Tamil lawyer, told him that only CBK could solve the ethnic issue to the satisfaction of both communities. Neelan was a cheerleader for Chandrika. Since I maintained my links with ICES, I saw the enthusiasm with which Neelan and the ICES lobbied for CBK.

With the declaration of a general election, I resigned from Lake House and entered the fray from the Kandy district. Since I had won the Provincial Council election handsomely and President Wijetunga supported me, I easily won nomination which usually is a very high bar for a newcomer. Naturally this disappointed the standing UNP organizer of the Galagedera electorate who played “a cat and mouse game” against me during the election campaign often encouraged by my own party rivals. However he had many opponents in the electorate including the Chairman of the Galagedera Pradeshiya Sabha named Kulasuriya, who backed me to the hilt.

I also had the advantage of launching a good advertising campaign designed by GW Surendra who had been a campaign advisor to President Premadasa. He coined the phrase “Pirisudu Sarath” [Honest Sarath] which became the campaign slogan. I later found that it even embarrassed Gamini’s managers. But my main rival was not the SLFP but Hameed who was challenged by me in his bailiwick of Harispattuwa. I found this early in the campaign when I discovered that my name had been eliminated as a speaker at our main inaugural public meeting in Kandy. But I managed to appeal to Wijetunga who was presiding and he decided that I too should speak.

Again on nomination day Hameed, who was the district leader, had decided that we should leave for the Kachcheri from our office in Trincomalee street. He had brought a Mercedes Benz car to take him and Gamini to the Kachcheri while we were to follow on foot thereby giving a clear signal to party supporters as to who were the big guns in the party. But I managed to persuade Gamini for all of us to march together to the Kachcheri and the full team made a good impression in town while Hameed followed in his Benz car without making the splash that he had planned to make. But that did not deter my rivals from trying to break up my relationship with Gamini which was jeopardizing their own re-election chances.

In the first few weeks our campaign meetings were well coordinated. Our “whistle stop” meetings were well attended and many were impressed by my campaign though, due to lack of experience, I did not have a good campaign manager and tended to personally micro manage the proceedings with only the help of my daughter Varuni who was at that time an undergraduate in the law faculty of Colombo Campus. On the other hand veterans like Hameed and Gamini had experienced managers who could orchestrate their efforts in a district wide campaign.

While the campaign was in midstream I was doing so well that Gamini’s managers began to pit their boss against me. I was shocked that several people who had worked together with me to promote Gamini were now working overtime to alienate him from me saying that I will be a threat to him in the future. I was not invited for forthcoming “whistle stop” meetings in other electorates and Lucky Jayawardene who was likely to siphon some of my votes was invited to take my place.

Their agents were sent to my office to lure my supporters from Nugawela to their offices for indoctrination about their candidates. I was disappointed about this behaviour but went about with my campaigning which was now entering the final weeks. On the other hand Wickreme Weerasooria, Srima Dissanayake and Mayantha who were oblivious to these undercurrents continued to encourage me.

The electoral pattern in Kandy district is such that the final result is a seven-five representation. The winner gets seven seats while the loser gets five. In this instance the UNP got seven members elected to Parliament while the SLFP won five. We were lucky because the SLFP under CBK had won by a large number of aggregate votes nationally though according to the PR system in place the number of elected MPs were almost even. The balance hung on the decision of minority MPs, particularly of Ashraff’s party-the Muslim Congress.

The MPs elected from the UNP were as follows; Gamini Dissanayake (199,207 votes), Lucky Jayawardene (66,340), Cader (66,136), Hameed (61,906), Tissa Attanayake (60,531), Sarath Amunugama (53,997) and a representative of Thondaman’s party. The SLFP elected Anuruddha Ratwatte, DM Jayaratne, Lakshman Kiriella, Kuruppuaaratchi and Weerawardene. Many seniors of both parties were not returned.

It was clear that but for the sabotage by Gamini’s handlers I would have got the second slot instead of Lucky Jayawardene. This was made clear in that in subsequent elections he was not even returned till many years later. Though disappointed I could take heart from the fact that I was elected to Parliament after beating many veterans who had been Ministers under Premadasa.

I also vowed to set up an independent power base which would help in the future without depending on the goodwill of friends who could be swayed by their campaign managers at election time. This approach helped me because I was returned in every subsequent election. After elections and helping Gamini to win the UNP leadership by beating Ranil and thereby establishing my “bona fides”, I remonstrated with Gamini about the election tactics of his agents. He apologized and said that he was helpless because all the strength of Ranil’s camp had been deployed to undercut him and he needed to gather the support of the other candidates, particularly Lucky Jayawardene, to ensure his survival. He arranged a family lunch with his wife with all his children present to make amends and restore our old friendship. As leader of the Opposition he went out of his way to make me, a newcomer to Parliament, at home.

(Excerpted from vol. 3 of the Sarath Amunugama autbiography) ✍️

Scrabble champ’s father describes the making of an icon in the game

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.