It’s the PC polls, stupid

The Election Commission (EC) has effectively demolished an argument that it is also responsible for the indefinitely postponement of the Provincial Council (PC) elections. EC Chairman R. M. A. L. Rathnayake and Commissioner General of Elections Saman Sri Ratnayake have very convincingly explained why the EC should not be blamed for the delayed PC polls. One cannot but agree with them that the EC is not constitutionally empowered to decide when to hold the PC polls, and the onus is on Parliament to legislate for the delayed elections to be held soon. Those who are blaming the EC are barking up the wrong tree.

There are two ways to enable the EC to hold the PC polls soon. One is to complete the delimitation process so that the PC elections can be held under the proposed mixed proportional system, and the other is for Parliament to decide that the PC polls be held under the existing Proportional Representation (PR) system, which, in our book, is the better option.

The government has chosen to delay the PC polls further by putting them on hold until the completion of the delimitation process, which is likely to take a month of Sundays.

The NPP election manifesto, A Thriving Nation: A beautiful Life, makes a solemn pledge to hold the PC polls within one year of the formation of an NPP government. “Provincial councils and local government elections, which are currently postponed indefinitely, will be held within a year to provide an opportunity for the people to join the governance” (p. 127). It is said that between saying and doing, many a pair of shoes is worn out.

The NPP government held the Local Government (LG) elections in May 2025, only to be disconcerted by their outcome. Although it managed to emerge the overall winner, its national vote share declined significantly. It also had to swallow its pride and enlist the support of many Opposition councillors to seize control of the hung local bodies, despite having condemned them as a bunch of rogues it would not touch with a barge pole.

Since the NPP government is wary of facing an electoral contest any time soon, it is up to the Opposition, which is lamenting that the PCs have remained unelected for a long time, to take the battle to Parliament. Is it that the Opposition parties themselves are not ready for an election although they are flaying the government for delaying the PC polls?

If the Opposition parties are ready for elections, what they should do is to pressure Parliament to resolve that the PC polls be held under the PR system and convey its decision to the EC. Mere rhetoric and moral grandstanding won’t do.

Commissioner General of Elections Ratnayake has rightly pointed out that those who are currently demanding the PC polls are responsible for their postponement. None of the political parties represented in the current Parliament has any moral right to criticise the postponement of the PC polls. All of them got together to ensure the passage of an amendment to the PC Elections Act unopposed during the Yahapalana government in 2017, thereby paving the way for the postponement of the PC elections.

Not that the PCs, if elected again, will help improve the people’s lot or achieve the country’s development goals. They have become a drain on the state coffers. But they must not remain unelected indefinitely because they are now functioning under the Provincial Governors appointed by the President. For all intents and purposes, they have been under the Executive since 2017, much to the detriment of people’s franchise and democracy. The CaFFE (Campaign for Free and Fair Elections) has called upon the NPP government either to stop dilly-dallying and hold the PC polls soon or to abolish the PCs, if it feels there is no need for them.

In a remarkable twist of irony, the NPP government led by the JVP, which plunged the country into a bloodbath in the late 1980s in a bid to prevent the establishment of the PCs and scuttle elections thereto, is now under pressure to hold the PC polls or abolish the PCs but cannot make a decision!

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.