Sri Lankan workers to gain expanded job opportunities in Cyprus; social security issue to be resolved urgently

Colombo, June 9 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lankan workers are set to receive expanded employment opportunities in Cyprus, while authorities have also moved to address long-standing concerns over social security benefits for retired migrant workers.

An official meeting was held yesterday (08) evening at the Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Ministry between the Resident High Commissioner of the Republic of Cyprus to Sri Lanka in New Delhi, Evagoras Vryonides, and Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Minister Vijitha Herath.

Discussions focused on strengthening bilateral relations between Sri Lanka and the Republic of Cyprus and expanding employment opportunities for Sri Lankan workers in the Cypriot labour market.

The High Commissioner expressed appreciation for Sri Lanka’s continued support to Cyprus at the international level and noted that there is strong demand for Sri Lankan workers. He highlighted significant job opportunities for certified and skilled workers in sectors such as nursing, tourism and hospitality, agriculture, construction, and maritime industries.

Minister Herath highlighted the need to take urgent steps to finalise and sign the relevant bilateral agreements as soon as possible, in order to enable Sri Lankans to fully benefit from these employment opportunities.

The Minister also raised concerns over difficulties faced by Sri Lankan workers who previously worked in Cyprus in obtaining “Social Security Benefits” after reaching the age of 65. He urged immediate intervention to resolve the issue.

Responding to the request, High Commissioner Vryonides said that he would take steps to address the matter promptly, noting that a significant number of affected individuals had already raised complaints.

He further said that the Government of Cyprus is keen to welcome the Sri Lankan Foreign Minister and extended an invitation for an official visit to Cyprus.