Economic recovery:some home truths

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has told Sri Lanka some home truths, the most disconcerting one being that economic recovery is beginning to lose momentum. It has attributed this situation to post-disaster disruptions, the West Asia conflict and rising global oil prices. These three factors are causing high inflationary risks, the IMF has said, warning that economic growth in 2026 could drop to 3% from 5% in 2025. Not that these facts were unknown to the government, the Opposition and the public, but dispassionate statements made by the IMF are credible and more impactful.

The parlous state of Sri Lanka’s economy is also due to several other factors, such as a sharp drop in tourism receipts, vehicle imports that helped revive the automobile sector and boost state revenue but took a heavy toll on foreign reserves, a huge increase in diesel consumption by oil-fired power plants to compensate for a generation loss caused by a coal procurement racket at Norochcholai, and staggering disaster recovery costs.

Problems like external pressures on the economy, caused by foreign conflicts, etc., are obviously beyond Sri Lanka’s control, but other causative factors could have been tackled much better. Vehicle imports should have been regulated properly, with a balance being maintained between revenue generation and the stability of foreign currency reserves.

The JVP-NPP government is apparently driven by a desire to brag that it has ‘filled the state coffers” and done much better than its predecessor on the economic front. It should have restricted vehicle imports and nonessentials much earlier at the first signs of trouble to ease mounting pressure on the rupee. Procrastination is the thief of forex. Measures taken to address the rupee and foreign currency crises must complement each other to help achieve the broader goal of economic stability and growth.

After weeks of dilly-dallying, the JVP-NPP government has taken some action to curtail the foreign exchange outflow. However, its efforts to reduce the national oil bill are far from satisfactory. Expenditure on fuel imports is the largest item in Sri Lanka’s import basket, comprising around 20% of the total import bill on average annually over the past 10 years, according to the Central Bank data. So, reducing the oil bill is half the battle in strengthening the country’s foreign currency reserves. The government should intensify its focus on increasing power generation from renewable sources and encouraging rooftop solar projects across the country while developing the public transport sector to reduce fuel consumption significantly.

The IMF can only assist in achieving economic stability, and sustained growth has to be achieved through a far-reaching reform drive. The biggest challenge before the JVP-NPP government is not holding the Opposition at bay but preparing the country for the task of straightening up the economy, instead of making more promises and promoting the “hand-out culture” in the name of social welfare. Most of all, corruption must be eliminated and austerity measures adopted in keeping with the promises of the JVP/NPP.

The IMF has reportedly indicated support for temporary fiscal easing in 2026 to accommodate relief measures linked to external shocks and reconstruction spending following Cyclone Ditwah, but the government is expected to return to stricter fiscal targets from 2027 onward. This kind of reprieve is popularly called an interval in hell. The Opposition had better take cognisance of the harsh economic reality and stop promising the public the stars and the moon in a bid to recover lost ground. It does not seem to have an alternative strategy to stabilise the economy and spur growth. If it knows how to do so, let it be urged to reveal its plan for the benefit of the country. Mere rhetoric won’t do.

While out of power, the JVP/NPP, too, pretended to have a panacea for all economic ills of the country and won elections. It is now struggling to make good on its election promises, most of which remain unfulfilled. The Opposition ought to stop trying to dupe the public into believing that more relief can be granted while the economy is in the current state.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.