Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation General partners ‘Kedella Art of Living 2025’ as Official Insurance Partner

Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation General Ltd., (SLICGL) was the Official Insurance Partner of the ‘Kedella Art of Living 2025’ Home and Lifestyle Exhibition, held from 14–16 November 2025, at the BMICH, Colombo, conducted for the 19th consecutive year.

Recognised as one of Sri Lanka’s leading construction and lifestyle exhibitions, Kedella attracted thousands of homeowners, builders, architects, interior designers, and entrepreneurs from around the country.

SLICGL firmly believes every Sri Lankan deserves the peace of mind knowing their home is secure. At Kedella 2025, SLIC highlighted the importance of home insurance in safeguarding families against unforeseen risks such as fire, natural disasters, and accidents. SLICGL also emphasised home insurance is no longer a luxury but necessity for protecting one’s most valuable asset.

In addition, with property ownership on the rise and lifestyle investments growing, SLICGL’s Home Protect Insurance is designed as a comprehensive insurance policy, with customised offers for today’s homeowners.

The SLICGL Home Protect Insurance scheme offers flexible coverage options at competitive premiums, ensuring protection is within reach for homeowners, property investors, and builders in Sri Lanka. Combining affordability with reliability, SLICGL empowers families to protect their homes and dreams without financial strain.

Facilitating greater ease of access, SLICGL participated in the Kedella activations to broaden customer reach and strengthen awareness. Over three days, the team engaged with visitors, introducing the SLICGL Home Protect Lite scheme which offers five flexible and affordable home insurance plans. Visitors to the exhibition were also briefed on the SLICGL Home Protect Insurance solution.

During the exhibition, the SLICGL sales force connected with over hundreds of visitors, successfully raising awareness, strengthening trust, addressing queries, and reaffirming the company’s commitment to supporting them in protecting their dreams.