President in Parliament

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake is often seen in Parliament, making special statements and long speeches in defence of his government. It is being argued in some quarters that no other President attended Parliament so frequently. This, however, is a moot point. We once commented on President Mahinda Rajapaksa’s regular presence in Parliament, asking whether he was trying to remind the Legislature that he was the boss. Why should the Presidents attend and address Parliament regularly?

President Dissanayake is apparently labouring under the misconception that he can shore up the government’s image single-handedly by attending Parliament and displaying his oratorical skills. Whenever he is sighted in Parliament, everybody knows that the government has blotted its copybook again and is badly in need of his help to distract the public from its blunders and misdeeds. President Dissanayake spoke in Parliament yesterday as well, stressing his government’s ‘neutral foreign policy’, among other things, for the umpteenth time.

Sri Lanka’s Constitution works the way it should only when the Executive is in a position to control the Legislature. When the President and the Prime Minister happen to represent two different political parties, the latter undermines the former, as was the case between 2001 and 2004, with President Chandrika Kumaratunga and Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe leading the SLFP-led People’s Alliance and the UNP-led UNF, respectively. They were at loggerheads, and President Kumaratunga finally went so far as to sack the UNF government and hold a snap general election, which her party won, helping her consolidate her power by regaining control of Parliament. President Maithripala Sirisena faced a similar situation after breaking ranks with the UNP-led UNF in 2018. Thus, the Presidents do everything in their power to keep the Legislature under their thumb lest alternative power centres should form around the Prime Ministers in Parliament even when their own parties are in power.

The President is constitutionally required to attend Parliament once every three months. Article 32 (3) of the Constitution says: “The President shall, by virtue of his office, attend Parliament once in every three months ….” Article 32 (4) says: “The President shall by virtue of his office also have the right to address and send messages to Parliament. The President also has the power to make the Statement of Government Policy in Parliament at the commencement of each session of Parliament and preside over ceremonial sittings of Parliament, according to Article 33.

These constitutional provisions are widely thought to be aimed at ensuring periodic engagement between the Executive and the Legislature, thereby promoting accountability, communication, and constitutional balance in a presidential system. The Executive President’s regular presence in Parliament theoretically signals his or her respect for the legislature and helps reinforce the notions of accountability and constitutionalism, but it can also be interpreted as a form of ‘soft power projection’ when it is intended to shape political narratives in favour of the ruling party.

The Executive should be mindful of the time constraints faced by the Legislature. An oft-heard complaint in Parliament is that the members of both the government and the Opposition are denied sufficient time to speak. Their anger is directed at the Speaker. Not all of them come out with anything sensible in their speeches and during debates, which more often than not descend into slanging matches and even fisticuffs; they are known to say very little in so many words and often go off on a tangent. However, their right to express their views in Parliament as elected people’s representatives cannot be questioned. It is their time that the Executive uses to make speeches and statements in the House to further the interests of his or her party. The Executive ought to render unto the legislators what is theirs and refrain from trying to overshadow the Legislature.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.