Higher tea volumes meet sluggish demand at Colombo auction

The auction offerings totalled 6.0 million kilogrammes (M/Kgs), up from the 5.3 M/Kgs on offer the previous week.

The Large and Semi-Leafy Orthodox teas realised a price advantage once again vis-à-vis the Orthodox/Rotovane BOP/BOPFs, which continued to witness a sluggish market.

The Ex-Estate offerings were fairly similar to last and comprised of 0.9 M/Kgs. The teas from the Western slopes showed a marginal improvement, whilst the Nuwara Eliya/Uda Pussellawas showed no change. The Uvas had on offer a selection of seasonal teas.

A few select Western BOP/BOPFs in the Best category appreciated by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme, whilst the others were irregular. In the Below Best category, select BOPs in the higher price bracket were firm and Rs.20 per kilogramme dearer, whilst the others were irregular and often easier.

The corresponding BOPFs were barely steady. At the lower end of the market, a majority of the BOPs were unsold due to a lack of suitable bids.

The corresponding BOPFs were firm for most, whilst the poor leaf invoices declined by up to Rs.20 per kilogramme. The Nuwara Eliya BOP/BOPFs did not attract any useful interest, perhaps following the relatively uninteresting quality.

The Uda Pussellawas were often neglected, following plainer quality. The Uvas – Seasonal teas, continued to sell reasonably well though at irregular rates, following the quality/overseas bids.

Other non-seasonal types – BOPs, were mostly unsold, due to a lack of suitable bids, whilst the corresponding BOPFs declined by Rs.50-100 per kilogramme.

The CTCs – High and Mid Grown BP1s, had hardly any offerings. The PF1s – Better sorts, were generally firm, whilst the others were mostly irregular. The corresponding Low Growns – BP1s, were up to Rs.50 per kilogramme easier. The PF1s – Select Best, were firm, whilst the others were Rs.20-40 per kilogramme easier.

Most traditional markets were active and prices often followed quality closely with the Plainer teas being difficult of sale.

The Low Growns totalled approximately 2.5 M/Kgs. The teas in the Semi Leafy, Tippy and Premium categories met with fair demand, whilst the Leafy category witnessed less demand.

In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues, the high-priced BOP1s were easier, whilst the balance sold around last levels. The Select Best and Best OP1s were firm, whilst the balance declined significantly towards the closure.

The OPs, in general, were easier. A few high-priced OPAs appreciated, whilst the balance declined sharply. The well-made PEK/PEK1s together with the cleaner teas at the bottom sold around last levels, whilst the balance declined.

In the Tippy catalogue, the select Best FBOPs were firm to easier, whilst the Best and cleaner Below Best sold around last levels. The balance was irregular, following quality.

The well-made FF1s together with the cleaner Below Best and cleaner teas at the bottom were firm, whilst the balance was easier.

In the Premium catalogue, the very Tippy teas sold around last levels, whilst the balance was easier.