Officers’ Mess by Sandra Joseph Nunez

There came out last year, though where is not specified, a book called Officers’ Mess, an account of the 1962 attempted coup by the daughter of one of the accused, Major Victor Joseph. He and the husband of his wife’s sister, Major Wilton White, were amongst the last to be discharged, before the last eleven defendants were found guilty. This was at the end of the trial, so by then they had spent over three years in jail.

Sandra Joseph Nunez was a little girl at the time, and she gives a vivid account of the suffering of the two families, deprived of their heads for what seemed to them a preposterous accusation. Based on what she heard from her families, she is convinced that the incarceration of her father and her uncle was unfair. This may well have been the case, but obviously she is not quite accurate in suggesting that the whole case was a trumped up job.

For there clearly was an attempt to overthrow the government, and there is no doubt that at least the ringleaders were guilty of what was a capital offence. Certainly the government reacted excessively, in introducing new legislation, but Sandra does less than justice to the enormity of what was planned, and the understandable fear of the government which prompted measures designed to squash the attempt conclusively.

But the book was fascinating, not least in its account of how the government case was strengthened by what seems to have been inordinate folly on the part of Colonel F C de Saram. When news of the attempt broke and questioning began, he handed himself in and said he took full responsibility for the coup, and that others had only been following his orders. His personal confession became the basis of the prosecution case, and it is possible, as Sandra claims, that without that they would have found it difficult to get a verdict in their favour.

F C’s contention in court, that he had not planned a coup but was preparing counter measures in case Felix Dias Bandaranaike tried to take power illegally himself, did not hold water, not least because there was no evidence at all that such a step had been contemplated. Besides, there was the original reason for government having to take steps, which was that Stanley Senanayake had been approached by Senior D I G Jungle Dissanayake to join the coup, and he had told his wife who had informed her father P de S Kularatne.

That this happened was not in question, and Sandra’s claim, that Jungle thought his subordinate officer would be more loyal to him than to his family, underscores the essentially schoolboy mentality of these officers who embarked on a plot with no understanding of the gravity of the step they had undertaken.

In passing, I should note that this account is not entirely accurate, because the book claims that Senanayake’s father-in-law was a cabinet minister, which was certainly not the case. It also claims that N Q Dias was a Minister, whereas he was only the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Defence and External Affairs.

Interestingly, the sheer immaturity of many of those involved was something I had looked at in a short story I wrote many years ago called ‘A Climax for the Colonel’. Its protagonist was based on F C, whom I knew well then, for he had clung to me for ages, on the strength of us both having been at Oxford. Indeed when I got in, he had come to see me, since he thought it a great achievement to have been awarded an Exhibition to Oxford when I was just 16.

When my story based on F C was published, I was called by Shelagh Anghie, wife of Tony Anghie who was one of those who had been convicted along with F C. This was 20 years after the coup, and they had long been divorced.

Shelagh told me that the story seemed to her to explain better than anything she had thought of over the years the reasons for her husband’s involvement in the coup, and the fascination F C had for the youngsters under him. As he aged, though his fascination for impressionable young men did not wane, schoolboys at the time I knew him, they took him less seriously. But at the height of his prestige, the youngsters were fascinated by him, with an emotional commitment that Sandra enunciates and which her father and uncle and it would seem Tony Anghie had obviously felt, to the detriment in the last case of his marriage.

Sandra’s mother and her aunt, sustained perhaps by their Catholic faith, did not think of questioning what their husbands might have done, and perhaps indeed, as their acquittal indicates, they were not as involved as Anghie had been. Certainly Sandra focuses on what seems to have been evidence trumped up against them, ridiculed by their brilliant counsel G G Ponnambalam who appeared for the defendants without charging a fee.

The scenes in court are interesting, as are the descriptions of life in the Bambalapitiya flats, where both families lived, a haunt as I experienced a few years later of the Burgher middle class. Descriptions of Christmas, bleak without fathers but nevertheless celebrated as best possible, with nativity plays, were delightful. But all these subjects were interspersed with accounts of reliance on God, and sometimes the repetitions of the need for faith and prayer can overwhelm.

This is not the case with the religious elements in the description of school, Holy Family Convent, with harsh nuns attempting to impose discipline on lively schoolgirls. That they were talented in what they were interested in was a problem for the nuns, though repeated assertions of the lessons they disliked smacked of schoolgirl trivia. But I suppose all this was part and parcel of recreating that world of long ago.

It was a very different world from that of the jail in which the men were held, and Sandra’s narrative recreates vividly the suffering of the men, held for a long time in isolation, and the anguish of their families when they visited. But the men managed to keep going, and the families found ways of communicating privately despite the guards who stayed right through any visit.

Shortly after the verdict, there was an appeal to the Privy Council, which was allowed, and all those who had been convicted were released. This was then followed by allegations about another coup, this one by the Sinhala Buddhist officers whose access to high positions in the forces the first coup plotters had resented. All the accused in this coup were acquitted, but two of them were said to have committed suicide in custody. Later the verdict was changed to culpable homicide in the case of Dodampe Mudalali.

All this is not part of Sandra’s brief, but it does show a contrast between the restraint with which those connected with a definite plot were treated, and the violence used against those who were victims of what seem to have been trumped up charges, including the then army commander General Richard Udugama.

He was the only senior officer amongst the accused then which suggests either that he was totally impractical or else that the charges were frivolous. The prosecution was by an Attorney General who had been brought in from outside, whereas the Attorney General at the time of the earlier coup was the universally respected Douglas Jansze.

I cannot help feeling that this was in the end of F C de Saram’s schoolboy antics, politicization of public offices and a hardening of attitudes, an acceptance of violence against political opponents, so that the state seemed quite happy with them falling out of windows. Felix Dias Bandaranaike, portrayed as a devil by Sandra, got his evidence by questioning, four years later the new government was not so restrained.

FAO Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific aims at “resilience from within”: Sri Lanka’s Active Engagement Reaffirmed

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.