Muslim groups in Sri Lanka call for ceasefire amid escalating Middle East conflict

Several Muslim religious and civil organisations in Sri Lanka have issued a joint statement expressing concern over the escalating conflict in the Middle East and calling all parties for an immediate ceasefire and diplomatic efforts to prevent further violence.

The statement, signed by groups including the All Ceylon Jamiyyathul Ulama, National Shoora Council, Muslim Council of Sri Lanka, and All Ceylon Union of Muslim League Youth Fronts, also urged the Government of Sri Lanka and the UN to take steps to ensure adherence to international law and the protection of civilians.

We, the undersigned Muslim religious scholars, community leaders, and civil organisations of Sri Lanka, express our profound concern and unequivocal condemnation of the grave and rapidly escalating massacres amidst deepening crisis in the Middle East.

We strongly denounce the unlawful aggression and military actions carried out by the Israeli Zionist regime, and the United States of America (USA), which have resulted in the tragic killings of innocent civilians, including in the Israeli bombing of a school in Minab, Iran on day one of the unprovoked war, ruthlessly ending the lives of 165 innocent primary female students. The deliberate targeting of non-combatants is a flagrant violation of international law, humanitarian norms, and the most fundamental principles of justice and human dignity.

We further condemn the assassination and targeting of sovereign leadership figures, including the Supreme Leader and the Head of State of the Islamic Republic of Iran. Such actions constitute a grave threat to the sovereignty of third world nations and a dangerous and reckless escalation that threaten regional and global stability.

This conflict poses serious consequences not only for the Middle East but also for economically vulnerable nations such as Sri Lanka. Disruptions to trade, energy supplies, employment of overseas workers, and essential commodities threaten the livelihoods of millions. Wars between powerful States inevitably inflict suffering far beyond their borders.

a) The Government of Sri Lanka to call for an immediate and unconditional ceasefire from all parties.

b) The UN to forthwith ensure meaningful and effective steps for the strict adherence to international law and the absolute protection of all civilians.

c) The parties to the conflict to cease fire immediately and have recourse to dialogue through the UN and other established mechanisms and a return to dialogue and peaceful resolution through credible international mediation.

We also urge the Government of Sri Lanka to stand firmly for justice, protect Sri Lankan citizens at home and abroad, and take proactive diplomatic and economic measures to shield the nation from the adverse consequences of this crisis.

May Allah protect the oppressed, restrain the aggressors, guide world leaders towards justice, and grant lasting peace and stability to humanity.