Gotabaya’s candidacy for 2020 presidential election

We were now on the verge of a Presidential election to be held in 2020. The SLFP which I represented did not contemplate contesting this election since our leader Maithripala Sirisena did not show any inclination to come forward. The April bombing of churches and hotels had left his reputation in tatters. His behaviour in respect of this incident was unacceptable. It was rumoured that he was on a visit to India and Singapore connected to a family matter though a medical check up may also have been thrown in.

The near certainty of a terrorist attack was clearly intimated to the local security apparatus by Indian intelligence services but no action was taken. The toll of deaths and injuries were large and recalled memories of the internecine war which rocked the nation 10 years before. Our promising tourist industry suffered a severe setback. The Catholic Church led by Cardinal Malcolm Ranjith was up in arms. On the other hand the UNP led by Ranil was facing a major split. Sajith Premadasa led a large number of MPs out of the party to form the Samagi Jana Balawegaya [SJB].

Premadasa became the likely right wing candidate to contest the forthcoming Presidential election though Ranil was prevaricating without giving him the nomination. At this stage Sirisena inducted me as the Chairman of the National Security Council which was the apex body in charge of coordinating intelligence regarding national security. Ranil, an ex-officio member, had stopped attending and we were very much on our own.

I was appalled at the incompetence of the NSC. It became clear that the Zaharan-led fundamentalist Islamic group had left a trail which if followed up would have nipped their conspiracy in the bud. For instance much earlier in time two constables had been killed by the Zaharan group at a check point in Vavuniya. Our intelligence agencies blundered by wrongly assuming that it was the work of ex-LTTE combatants in spite of much evidence which militated against such a conclusion. It was also a good pointer to the slipshod modus operandi of the police in the North and East which had earned international condemnation.

Later there was an explosion in a coconut estate in Eastern province where the Zaharan group practiced detonating bombs. The villagers of Kattankudy had complained several times that this extremist group living within their midst was prone to violence and were creating trouble. They had assaulted the local religious dignitaries who had complained to the police and senior administrative authorities. But nothing was done because it now appears that some of the perpetrators were paid informers of army intelligence who could not be exposed.

When the police were hot on the trail of the Zaharan gang, army intelligence operatives had asked them to call off the hunt. Not many in our Security Council had even visited Kattankudy which was the epicenter of the violence prone Islamists. Since I had done demographic research in Kattankudy many years earlier I was more familiar with the terrain and social conditions of the village than many of the top sleuths in the Security Council. I knew for instance that being traders, the Muslims of Kattankudy had an all island network of contacts. Zaharan could easily activate it in places like Mawanella, Kuliyapitiya and Gampola as it later transpired.

I learnt first hand of the pathetic ignorance of the President and Prime Minister of the Yahapalana regime when it came to security matters. It was a wonder that they did not bring more disasters in their wake. I directed the officers to follow the “money trail” and found that the Central Bank officials were reluctant to cooperate quoting confidentiality rules even to the Security Council. Senior Lawyer Nigel Hatch whom the President co-opted on my recommendation was appalled at the absence of professionalism in the highest ranks of the security establishment.

In this background of uncertainty and incompetence there began a move to support the candidature of Gotabaya Rajapaksa who had been an excellent manager of the war effort and the subsequent “greening” of Colombo city. Since I was a personal friend of Gotabaya I proposed to the SLFP that we should support his candidature as his policies were the closest to ours. By this time the SLPP and SLFP were working together in the Parliamentary Opposition. Since the SLFP was dithering I decided to attend the opening of GR’s campaign held in Shangri-La Hotel without bothering to get party approval.

Basil seated me with the leaders of other parties affiliated to GR’s campaign. This may have woken up the SLFP Central Committee because leaders like Nimal Siripala also demanded the freedom to join the GR campaign. Some others wanted to “wait and see” the outcome of the conflict that was brewing between Ranil and Sajith. I however threw myself into GR’s campaign during the last few months remaining in my Parliamentary tenure.

In the Presidential election that followed GR won with an unprecedented majority having polled 69 lakhs of votes. It was the highest majority up to then of a Presidential candidate, including that polled by his brother MR. GR’s tenure had a promising beginning. At the swearing in as President he politely refused to wear the crimson satakaya that was offered to him by MR who was anxious to create the optics of a continuity of Rajapaksa family rule.

He also decided to discontinue the practice of accepting “unsolicited projects”which was the main reason for corruption in previous regimes. It had given an unfair advantage to MR’s relatives and friends. He then ordered that his administration should desist from expensive “shows” and ceremonies and to get down to business. He himself began surprise visits to trouble spots as he had successfully done as Secretary of Defence and later as the Czar of Urban Development. None of this was pleasing to the Rajapaksa family who had decided that GR should be surrounded by MR loyalists headed by PB Jayasundera who had worked efficiently with Presidents from CBK’s time.

Not satisfied with this intervention through PB they later inducted Basil Rajapaksa, who was a dual citizen, as Finance Minister. Thus Basil, PB Jayasundera and Cabraal formed a steel ring round GR to continue the old MR policies which were universally recognized as having bred high level corruption. At this stage GR began to confide in his friends that he was increasingly isolated and unable to pursue the radical policies he had promised to the electorate. He had become a prisoner of the Rajapaksa family.

Then a series of misfortunes and policy blunders hit the GR administration with disastrous results. Some were beyond his control while others were “man made” due to his lack of experience. The net result was that he had to leave office prematurely under humiliating conditions. It was a disaster of the highest magnitude and previously not seen in Sri Lankan politics.

The first blunder arose due to Jayasundera’s overconfidence. Soon after his assuming office I met him on a social occasion. We are good friends and he trusted me. He told me that he was planning to fix the ailing economy in a short time and then retire to his farm in Nikaweratiya to grow mangoes on a commercial scale. He entertained no doubts about the efficacy of his prescriptions for recovery which he had mulled over during his enforced leave of absence under the Yahapalana administration. It must be stated in fairness to him that prior to the controversial efforts of Ravi Karunanayake and Mahendran after 2015, the Sri Lankan economy was on a growth path which was commended by the IMF and ADB.

From 2006 to 2014 economic growth averaged 6.5 percent per year. Per capita GDP increased from USD 1,242 to USD 3,819 by 2014. The debt to GDP ratio had declined from 90 percent in 2005 to 69 percent in 2014. As the IMF country report of September 2014 stated “Sri Lanka’s economic growth has been among the fastest in Asia’s frontier and developing economies in recent years.” We were no longer a LDC (least developed country) but a middle income country.

No doubt after the global recession governments were pumping liquidity into their economies to stimulate growth. Without investment the lagging industries and services which had taken a hit could not be resurrected to pre-crisis levels. During the US meltdown the government, on the recommendation of the Fed, had even reversed their policies regarding bailing out private entities when they pumped money into insolvent enterprises, particularly banks. They were, in the celebrated phrase of the time “Too big to fail”.

In Sri Lanka, instead of pumping money from the Treasury to ailing enterprises PBJ presented a novel idea. To short circuit bureaucratic delays which the private sector had always complained about [particularly about delays in VAT reimbursements and organized corruption in delaying payments] he slashed taxes from the big companies which meant that government revenue was greatly reduced with all its attendant consequences. To do this he roped in WD Lakshman, his nominee to head the Central Bank, who allowed the printing of money to cover part of the deficit in accordance with new monetary theories emanating from US academia.

It was called MMT or Modern Monetary Theory. Several consequences followed. The heavily indebted local businesses did not go for expansion in the light of global loss of demand and Covid. Many used this unexpected windfall to cover their debts or on conspicuous consumption. The inefficiencies of the state banks prevented a significant recapitalization. The non performing loan portfolio [NPL] which was largely caused by political interference by UNP Finance Ministers, was not significantly reduced.

What did happen was that these windfall savings were utilized by the new rich for consumption which tended to increase the foreign exchange deficit. Money was spent on latest automobiles, foreign travel and ‘show’ consumer items. Some of the richest salted away their windfall savings in foreign locations. The list of investors in secret funds like those divulged in Pandora and Panama papers and similar “slush funds”, is an indication of the corruption that marked the UNP regime.

This approach continued thanks to policy blunders of the GR presidency. An obvious result of this financial skulduggery was rapidly rising inflation which led to social distress, business disadvantages, rupee devaluation and added commitments by way of ISB (International Sovereign Bond) borrowings. PBJ’s experiments had gone horribly wrong and laid the foundation for disaster when the unanticipated Covid epidemic hit the country. Covid emasculated all the sources of our national income such as tourism, foreign remittances, external trade and domestic production. Further foolish policy decisions-particularly about agriculture were in the pipe line, and the country was heading for an unprecedented disaster and GR was led to an ignominious exit which laid him and his party prostrate, perhaps never to rise again.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.