From applause to adventure: Ceylinco Life achievers take wing again

Ceylinco Life has once again transformed outstanding performance into unforgettable experiences, continuing to set the benchmark for excellence and employee recognition in Sri Lanka’s life insurance sector by rewarding its highest achievers with exclusive overseas tours that blend celebration, camaraderie, and well-earned indulgence.

As 2025 came to a close, 27 top performers embarked on a vibrant three-night, four-day escape to Thailand, where they explored the grandeur of the Grand Palace and the Temple of the Emerald Buddha, enjoyed a day of thrills at Dream World, and relaxed with a magical dinner cruise on the upper deck. Meanwhile, another group of 14 sales stars experienced the best of Malaysia, from the cool heights of Genting Highlands and its outdoor theme park to scenic cable car rides, iconic visits to the Batu Caves and Petronas Twin Towers, and memorable dining experiences, all complemented by four-star hotel accommodation.

These journeys are part of Ceylinco Life’s proud tradition of celebrating exceptional performance with world-class experiences. Earlier this year, top sales achievers were also rewarded with all-expenses-paid tours to Malaysia, Dubai, and Turkey, featuring immersive itineraries that showcased iconic landmarks, cultural heritage, and modern marvels. These tours not only recognise individual and team achievements but also foster strong bonds, recharge motivation, and celebrate success on a global stage, the Company said.

More than just holidays, these tours reflect Ceylinco Life’s deeply embedded culture of recognising excellence, turning ambition into opportunity and achievement into experiences that inspire. For those seeking a dynamic and rewarding career in the life insurance industry, Ceylinco Life said it offers not only professional growth but also the chance to be celebrated and inspired as part of a winning team.

“Besides rewarding performance, these efforts promote employee branding, strategically shaping how current and prospective employees perceive the company as a place to work, and turn staff into authentic brand advocates for the company’s values, culture, and mission,” the Company said.

Bourse radiates optimism as UK grants tariff-free concession to local apparel exports

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.