Hydra-headed scourge and dirty politics

Partisan politics has spared hardly anything in this country, with politicians striving to gain political mileage out of everything. It is therefore not surprising at all that the so-called ‘national programmes’ end up being mere political campaigns and run out of steam with the passage of time. Operation Yukthiya, launched by the previous government with the ambitious goal of neutralising the underworld, is a case in point.

The Mahinda Rajapaksa government branded its political opponents as ‘traitors’, and made the most of the defeat of the LTTE to further its political interests. President Maithripala Sirisena embarked on an anti-narcotics campaign to prepare the ground for his re-election bid, and condemned his critics as crooks. His plan went awry due to the Easter Sunday terror attacks (2019). The NPP government has launched a country-wide drug-bust, and is demonising its opponents as drug dealers.

The NPP made use of an increase in drug detections in Tangalle and adjoining areas to make the SLPP out to be a party of drug dealers. It used the alleged involvement of a former SLPP local government member in the drug trade to bolster its claim. The boot is now on the other foot. An NPP local councillor, her husband and her son have been arrested and remanded on narcotics charges. The Opposition has got hold of something to beat the government with.

The NPP politician’s husband, arrested with heroin, is a school principal. This shows the gravity of the problem. Drug dealers are a very innovative lot. They use multiple facades and fronts to conceal their dirty operations. Following the 2004 assassination of Sarath Ambepitiya, an upright High Court judge, we revealed that Kudu Nauffer, who masterminded the murder, had, through a front, sponsored food and beverages served at a judicial officers’ function. A drug dealer, named Shiyam, and his wife, posed as wealthy garment factory owners, before being arrested with a huge stock of heroin in their Ward Place residence, where they had entertained political and business leaders among others. Kudu Lal, a heroin supplier in Colombo, had himself elected to the Colombo Municipal Council. Subsequently, he fled the country. In 2002, the then IGP T. E. Anandaraja attended a drug dealer’s party in a Colombo hotel. In 2013, a drug dealer obtained a letter from the then Prime Minister D. M. Jayaratne’s office, requesting the Customs to clear some freight containers on a priority basis; the Customs detected 131 kilos of heroin, concealed in one of them. Such is the socio-political clout of drug barons, who are also known to shower funds on some politicians and political parties.

In democratic societies, regimes change, with the declining elite being replaced by a new, more vigorous one. This is what Vilfredo Pareto called the circulation of elites. In this country, regime changes lead to the circulation of underworld figures as well, with the criminals identified with the outgoing regime being replaced by those working for the incoming one. However, criminals, such as drug dealers, do not circulate when regime changes occur. They retain their political clout through various means and carry out their sordid operations under all governments.

As for the proliferation of narcotics, the wild allegations the NPP and its opponents are trading and their arguments are tainted with false generalisation or drawing conclusions about a whole group based on a small or unrepresentative sample. These claims and counterclaims have riven the electorate along political lines, much to the detriment of the country’s efforts to eliminate the drug menace.

It is imperative that the government and the Opposition stop their mud-slinging campaigns and take cognisance of the severity of the drug problem and how drug dealers have infiltrated political parties, the police and other state institutions. They must join forces to eliminate the hydra-headed drug scourge.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.