BOI launches ‘Invest in Sri Lanka’ forum

Sri Lanka’s economic resurgence is taking center stage as the nation prepares to host the Sri Lanka Investment Forum 2026. Backed by a foundation of stable macroeconomics and disciplined policy reform, the Board of Investment (BOI) will partner with the European Union, the Asian Development Bank, and UN ESCAP to be organized on 30th March 2026 at Cinnamon Life to showcase a renewed landscape of investor confidence and high-growth opportunities.

The forum aims to establish Sri Lanka as a center for sustainable, high-value, and technology-driven growth in the wake of its economic recovery. The forum is designed to connect global investors, multinational corporations, development finance institutions, and hedge funds with a country that is redefining its focus on high-value, sustainable, and technology-driven growth. The Forum, which is themed “Investing in Sri Lanka’s Green and Connected Future,” will emphasize the attractive opportunities that investors have in projects that combine environmental stewardship with regional and global connectivity.

The nation of Sri Lanka is in a favorable position within the global movement toward sustainable supply chains, technology-driven industries, and climate-resilient growth due to its strategic location along some of the world’s busiest maritime trade routes, as well as its ambitious renewable energy initiatives and emerging digital infrastructure.

The ‘Invest in Sri Lanka’ forum is positioned as one of the most significant investment gatherings in South Asia, offering the opportunity to engage directly with a country on the cusp of transformation. For those seeking early access to high-growth markets and meaningful investment partnerships, the message is unequivocal: Sri Lanka’s next growth chapter is unfolding, and the time to engage is NOW. Click on srilankainvestmentforum.com to register. (BOI)

Novus Technologies joins LankaPay Technovation Awards 2026 as Platinum Sponsor

Ogilvy Group clinches 6 Effie metals for campaigns responding to national priorities

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.