Cuteefly scene…for Aluth Avurudda

Indunil Kaushalya Dissanayaka, operating under the trade name Cuteefly, is renowned for creating unique candle designs for special occasions.

In February, Valentine’s Day was in the spotlight, via her candles.

With the Sinhala and Tamil New Year, commonly called Aluth Avurudda, on the horizon, Indunil says she is inspired by the cultural significance of candles in Sri Lankan traditions, where candles symbolise light, hope, and renewal, and, with this in mind, she indicated that she is creating special candles to usher in the New Year.

Says Indunil: “I’ve created a beautiful Milk Spilling Candle that can be lit at home to welcome the new year and bring prosperity to your home.

“This candle, shaped like a pot of boiling milk, is a wonderful way to light your home for a year of auspiciousness!”

Cuteefly candle designs, says Indunil, incorporate traditional Sri Lankan elements, such as intricate patterns, floral motifs, or auspicious symbols.

Aluth Avurudda, is a significant cultural celebration in Sri Lanka, marking the beginning of the traditional Sinhala/Tamil calendar, and is a time for renewal, joy, and festivities.

It’s a time to bid farewell to the old and welcome the new, reflecting on past experiences and looking forward to fresh starts.

The celebration is deeply rooted in Sri Lankan traditions, with rituals, food, games, and customs that bring families and communities together.

The festivities include traditional foods like kiribath (milk rice), sweets, and games, and Indunil is keen to ensure that her Aluth Avurudda candles will give the joyful activities an extra special touch.

If readers need to contact Indunil, her number is 0778506066 (direct and WhatsApp)

Venerable Rahula Thera’s 35-year green mission and national Namal Uyana

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.