Basilur Tea marks Int’l Tea Day with Roots of Ceylon launch

The Sri Lankan premium Ceylon Tea brand, Basilur Tea, launched the Roots of Ceylon initiative in celebration of the International Tea Day, inviting the tea enthusiasts to tie into the rich history of Ceylon Tea.

With 202 years having passed since the first tea plants arrived in Sri Lanka, this year’s celebration marked a significant milestone in tea history and culture. Through the Roots of Ceylon initiative, Basilur Tea planted 202 new tea plants as an ode to the industry that took the flavours of Ceylon Tea to the world.

Guided by its philanthropic values, the Roots of Ceylon initiative was focused on the intention of bringing communities across the globe together. This campaign connected tea connoisseurs who adore Basilur Tea to Sri Lanka’s rich tea heritage.

Basilur Tea Export Chairman Dr. Gamini Abeywickrama said, “This year, the International Tea Day holds great significance, as it also marks 202 years since tea plants were first brought to the nation. Roots of Ceylon allowed us to honour our vibrant history and culture while welcoming a new chapter of tea with our consumers. Remembering Ceylon’s legacy and having the opportunity to be part of that story is incredibly special to all of us.”

Inspired by the International Tea Day theme ‘Fostering Growth and Inclusion’, the Roots of Ceylon initiative was created to enrich Sri Lanka’s tea industry for the next generation.

Dr. Abeywickrama, joined by Managing Director Thushari Abeywickrama and their sons Finance Director Rajitha Abeywickrama and Marketing Director Charaka Abeywickrama as well as Basilur Tea estate workers and their children, took part in the planting ceremony of the Roots of Ceylon initiative at the Bucsh Tea Estate in Baddegama.

With tea culture evolving globally, Basilur Tea leads the way in redefining tea. From premium gift products to the freshest luxury handcrafted teas, the brand offers over 600 products, creating blends with bold flavour profiles, pairings, and aromas.

As a globally renowned tea brand, Basilur Tea currently supplies many countries, including international hotel chains, luxury lounges and selected retail outlets. Driven by purpose, philanthropy and the community, Basilur Tea continues to build upon the legacy of premium Ceylon Tea.