Emotional Chamari takes blame for Sri Lanka loss at T20WC

ICC - Sri Lanka captain Chamari Athapaththu believes she has let her side down and missed what could be her final chance to guide them to the knockout stages of the ICC Women's T20 World Cup.

The island nation missed a major opportunity to stay in contention for the semi-finals of the T20 World Cup when they fell to the West Indies by five wickets in Bristol on Sunday and now must win their remaining two fixtures at the tournament and rely on other results going their way to have any chance of qualifying for the final four.

For Chamari, who managed just two runs with the bat against the West Indies as Sri Lanka were skittled for 98, it could also mean she misses out on leading the side into the knockout stages of the T20 World Cup for the first time as she heads into the final stages of her 10th appearance at the tournament.

Chamari has been present at every edition of the T20 World Cup since its inception in 2009 and the Sri Lanka captain put on a brave face when fronting the media following the loss to the West Indies.

"I think I played around 18 years for the national team and I could never get a chance to take my team into a semi-final of a World Cup.

"Even though I have achieved many things personally, I think I’m a failure as a captain, because I think that’s big pain for a player.

"I think I tried my best, I think I should have played more responsible than this and if I have played more responsible than this today, we could have won this match today.

"So, I regret that. Especially I don’t like to blame anyone and I think I have more responsibility as a player, as the captain of the team and as a player with more experience.

There is still a glimmer of hope for Chamari and Sri Lanka, with the side still yet to play T20 World Cup fixtures against Ireland and Scotland at this tournament and they could still progress with wins in both those matches.

They will be relying on other results going their way though, with hosts England and Sunday's conquerors West Indies sitting pretty at the top of the Group B standings with three wins each from as many encounters at the tournament thus far.

Just where that leaves Sri Lanka at the end of the group phase remains to be seen, while Chamari was tight-lipped as to whether she will continue on with the aim of representing the side at the next edition of the T20 World Cup in Pakistan in 2028.

"For now, I can’t give any explanation about that, because with my age, now I’m 36 years old," Chamari added.

"So, I try my best to keep my physical fitness in a good level, and to keep my skills in a high level.

"If the team wants, I will play in the future, but with my performance level and fitness level, it will be decided if I play or not."