Nations Trust Bank delivers PAT of LKR 14.9Bn for 9 months

Nations Trust Bank PLC reported strong financial results for the 9 months ending 30th September 2025, reporting a Profit After Tax (PAT) of LKR 14.9Bn, up 23% YoY. The Bank’s performance is underpinned by strong asset growth, steady Net Interest Margins (NIMs) and asset quality with a Net Stage 3 Ratio of 1.03%. A strong capital base continued to be the foundation of the Bank’s growth story with a Return on Equity (ROE) of 23.20%, highlighting the Bank’s success in implementing a well-structured strategy.

Nations Trust Bank, Director & Chief Executive Officer, Hemantha D Gunetilleke, stated, “The Bank’s performance in 3Q 2025 demonstrates NTB’s financial strength and the successful execution of a clearly defined strategy. Customer lending grew by LKR 131Bn, a 45% increase over the first nine months, significantly contributing to the growth of businesses and economic revival across customer segments. This demonstrates our focus on service excellence, digital empowerment and strategic planning that places our customers at the centre of everything we do. Our robust capital position and strong liquidity buffers continue to highlight our strength and readiness for sustained growth.”

As a result of efficient asset-liability management and prudent pricing strategies, the Bank was able to sustain a NIM of 6.15%. The Bank’s Earnings Per Share for the nine months ending 30th September 2025 increased to LKR 45.10, against LKR 36.80 recorded during the same period last year. Asset quality remained sound, with the Net Stage 3 Ratio contained at 1.03%, underscoring effective credit risk management.

Strong financial performance continues to bolster NTB’s capital base with a Tier 1 Capital Ratio of 18.90% and a Total Capital Adequacy Ratio of 20.03%, well above the regulatory requirements of 8.5% and 12.5%, respectively.

SLT-MOBITEL becomes first in Sri Lanka to achieve fastest 5G speeds exceeding 10Gbps

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.