ICRC says sustained, collective efforts critical to address issue of missing persons

The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) on 30 August honoured the thousands of people around the world who are either missing or separated from their families due to armed conflict, violence, disasters and migration, standing in solidarity with families who endure the pain of not knowing the fate of their loved ones.

In Sri Lanka, the ICRC said thousands of families of missing persons from all communities across the country are still waiting for answers. Families of missing persons have the right to know what has happened to their loved ones. Unable to grieve, find closure or rebuild their lives, these families often struggle to meet the emotional, economic, legal, administrative, and social challenges posed by the absence of their missing loved one and the uncertainty that comes with it.

Addressing the needs of families of missing persons is a complex, multi-faceted process. Families are key partners and rights-holders and they are at the heart of this process. While national authorities have the primary responsibility to address their needs, local stakeholders can contribute to a broader, sustained response by building a comprehensive framework of support to address the diverse needs of families. Central to this is the search itself, a vital step toward the clarification of the fate and whereabouts of missing persons, involving collaborative action by multiple stakeholders.

Presently in Sri Lanka, the ICRC implements the Missing Persons Project which aims to foster a sustainable response to the issue of missing persons by supporting families, strengthening national and local capacities and enabling coordinated, state-led and community-based efforts to clarify the fate and whereabouts of the missing.

Addressing the issue of missing persons is also crucial for peace and reconciliation. Unresolved cases can perpetuate trauma, deepen grievances and hinder community healing long after violence has ended. Sustained political commitment is necessary to resolve the issue in the long-term, even decades after an armed conflict.