My hard start in life and surviving a difficult childhood

Diyalagoda is a sleepy coastal village near the Maggona Bazaar, about three miles from Beruwala. My ancestral home, ‘Church View,’ stood beside the backyard of St. Sebastian’s Church. The big church dwarfed our house by its side. For a few hours during the day our house stood in its shade. I remembered the church, rather than the house, as my birthplace.

I remember my father taking me to the church’s front compound in the evenings to watch the sunset. We sat on one of the steps from the narrow street that linked the church to the Galle Road. My father showed me the sunset, cars, and buses. One evening, I fell from his lap while sitting on the steps, cutting the skin just below my right eyebrow. He carried me to the nearby dispensary where a nurse bandaged my forehead. My mother was shocked to see me with a bandage and started crying.

Seven decades later, I visited Diyalagoda church with my only surviving brother, Nihal. The church had recently been refurbished, and the smell of fresh wall paint lingered. I wondered why such a large church was built in the mid-19th century in a small, remote village. Nihal told me that caste groups preferred to have their own churches, and ‘our’ church represented the Karawa caste families. It features beautiful murals and stained-glass windows and can accommodate more than 1,000 devotees.

The steps in front of the church, where I sat with my father to watch the sunset, were no more. The church compound had been flattened to make room for a car park. From the church front, I saw only a few houses and the statue of Mother Mary. It is difficult to see the sea, as I did many decades ago, because of the buildings in front of the church.

Behind the church, adjacent to our house, was the Sinhala primary school. Small kids in their school uniforms were playing in the compound. I visualized Nihal as a toddler playing in the school compound. Two women waiting to collect their children recognized Nihal and exchanged greetings. One of them was the current owner of our house. She invited us to visit the house. It was a lower-middle-class residence with a small front garden.

From the gravel road behind the church, a few steps brought us to the portico of ‘our’ house. The host invited us to the sitting room and offered tea. I could see a large cross hanging on the wall, along with a few framed family photographs. Artificial flowers and a few small toys were on the large table. There was a TV receiver on a metal stand and a music system under it.

I told our host that I was born in this house more than 70 years ago and asked her permission to see the room where I was born. It was a tiny room with a large window. A hanging curtain covered it and blocked the sunlight. The floor was the original slate and there was a baby sleeping on the bed; she was the host’s third child. I could not recall any details about that room then but thought about my mother and father, as well as my maternal and paternal grandmothers, who once lived there. They had all passed away many years ago. Nihal told me they were watching over us from heaven and would be glad to see us at our house after 70 years.

I reluctantly left the place after taking a few photographs. Outside, I wandered through the recently built turnstile-type gate meant to keep cows out of the churchyard. The jungle behind the house has not changed over the years. In the scrub, there were beautiful birds and hare. The swamp further away hosted many migratory birds in July. Some people hunt wild boar, birds, and  thalagoyas there.

I walked up to the low parapet wall of the cemetery. My only sister, Beatrice, was buried 74 years ago in that cemetery. I looked over the parapet and Nihal showed me tentatively the spot where she was buried. He remembered the tiny coffin that carried her small corpse from the church to the cemetery. I felt her presence and shed a tear for her. I was sad because I had never seen my sister. It struck me that Beatrice would have been 74 years old now had she had a chance to live a normal life.

I was angry because Eusabius Uncle, my maternal granduncle, did not help my mother and my sister as he did when Nihal was born. He had a grudge against my father because of his refusal to give Nihal to him for adoption. Uncle Eusabius wanted to adopt Nihal. He paid the hospital expenses of my mother’s confinement to deliver Nihal at St Michael’s Nursing Home in Colombo. He told my mother that she could have more children, and that giving Nihal to him and his wife would not harm my mother or Nihal. Giving Nihal to them would ease her economic difficulties and he would have a better life as their son, uncle said. He and his wife bought new clothes and toys for Nihal and expected to bring him to their home soon. When the adoption of Nihal failed, Eusabius Uncle cut off his relationship with my mother.

About 18 months later, my mother went to a public hospital in Slave Island to deliver Beatrice because Eusabius Uncle had refused to pay for her confinement at a private hospital as he had for Nihal. My mother asked him for help, but he refused. She went to the hospital in Slave Island with my father who admitted her. He did not have the money to pay someone to attend to her there. My mother did not know anybody at the hospital and her only visitor was my father who came in the evenings.

My granduncle’s refusal to buy some medicine and vitamins for Beatrice hurt me deeply. He was angry with my parents for refusing to given tem Nihal for adoption. My father, too, was partly responsible for my sister’s death. He should have found money to buy medicine, milk, and vitamins without expecting Uncle Eusabius to buy them. While visiting the child at the hospital, my father dropped the baby’s milk bottle and broke it. The hospital staff gave her a new bottle. Many years later, I asked my mother why my father did not buy another bottle. She said he did not have five rupees to pay for a new bottle.

My mother told me that she should have agreed to give Nihal for adoption to Uncle Eusabius and Aunt. That may have made them help bring up the little girl as well and this might have saved her life. Nihal remembered returning home from the cemetery after burying his little sister. He felt lonely at home and feared that he, too, might die soon. For many months, he avoided the small room where Beatrice had spent her short life as a sick child.

Standing by the parapet, I thought Uncle Eusabius could have punished my mother for disobedience later without jeopardizing my little sister’s life. He could have cut off his regular financial support to my mother until my father completed his studies. Beatrice contracted pneumonia at the hospital where she was born. When she was brought home, she was sick and weak. She died when she was six weeks old. She was baptized at the church in the presence of two godparents. I wanted to talk to them about my sister and mother, but I could not as they had died many years ago.

My mother was four months pregnant after my sister’s death. She was expecting me, her third child, on April 15, 1951. But on April 8 she nearly died with her unborn child. My paternal grandmother, after an argument with mother in the morning, partly cut the rattan weave of her bed and covered it with a mat, expecting her to lie down on it after lunch. My mother fell through the bed frame, hit her head on the cement floor and became unconscious. My maternal grandmother who was visiting shouted for help and neighbors came running. They raised her, head bleeding, on to a sofa and someone ran to the Galle Road to fetch a car to take her to the Aluthgama hospital.

She regained consciousness after about 30 minutes and delivered me at home that evening with the help of the village midwife. Someone told my father about what had happened and he reacted furiously chasing his mother out of the house when he came home for the first time after my birth.

My grandmother denied culpability and said she was ready to swear at St. Anne’s Church that she was innocent. But when my father threw out her few belongings fro the house, she went away promising to never return. She boasted that her nephews in Beruwala would look after her.

After my tumultuous birth, the economic conditions of our family deteriorated rapidly. My father continued to study at the Government Teacher Training College without a salary. He mortgaged our house to Uncle Eusabius so that my mother could for two years get Rs. 100 every month for household expenses. He only took a Rs 15 monthly allowance from that money for himself and, according to my mother, during his two-year training period had never even bought a cup of tea for himself at the college canteen as he did not have money.

Every Friday, he came home and played with us two kids, and early on Monday morning he went back to the College. He might not have had a sense of our home expenses. There were four mouths to be fed – my maternal grandmother, my brother, my mother, and me but my mother somehow managed to feed all of us and protect her children.

Six months later, my paternal grandmother returned home saying she could not live without her only son, although he had become a demon because of others’ influence. My mother feared that her mother-in-law would clash with her own mother. In addition, the number of people to be fed at home increased to five. The two children needed regular medical attention and medicines swallowed most of my mother’s small budget. What was unbearable for her at home was her mother-in-law’s constant nagging and accusations.

She accused my mother of having a lover. She dug up the story of my maternal grandmother’s difficult times with her neighbor in Paiyagala. She claimed that my maternal grandmother and my mother were women of easy virtue.

Because of false accusations and the lack of money to buy baby food, my mother toyed with the idea of committing suicide. She thought of buying poison to kill herself and her children. At the church, during Easter confessions, she told the parish priest her agony and the plan. He advised her not to destroy lives entrusted to her by God and to suffer until God comes to her rescue.

The priest contacted Uncle Valentine, one of my mother’s uncles, who lived in Maggona. He ran a saappu badu kade (shop selling imported goods). The priest asked him to help his niece, my mother. He met her at the church and listened to her story in front of the priest. He promised her baby food and medicine. She was grateful to Valentine Uncle for his generosity and kindness and promised to repay him. My father could not afford to pay for the baby food and medicine but he promised to repay when he got a better job as a trained teacher.

When I was a teenager, my mother told me we still owed Valentine Uncle a lot of money for milk powder and medicine she had bought on credit from his shop. Several years later, I met Valentine uncle at a wedding. We discussed many things, but he never mentioned how he had helped my mother and her family. I thanked him for helping us when we were in dire straits and saving our lives. I offered to pay what we owed him. He politely refused to accept any money.

THE RICH ARE GETTING RICHER, THE POOR ARE GETTING POORER – THAT’S THE DILEMMA

“One more such victory and we are done for” – King Pyrrhus of Epirus, in 279 B.C.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.