Siyapatha Finance to issue LKR 3.75 billion debentures, reinforcing commitment to growth

Siyapatha Finance PLC, the largest subsidiary of Sampath Bank PLC and a prominent leader distinguished in Sri Lanka’s non-bank financial sector, announced its decision to raise a maximum of Rs. 3.75 billion through its debenture issue. The Board of Directors approved the decision to raise funds through the issuance on the 26th August, 2025 and on the 28th October,2025.

Fitch Ratings has assigned Siyapatha Finance PLC ‘s (A (lka)/Stable) proposed Sri Lankan rupee -denominated subordinated debentures up to LKR 3.75 billion a final National Long-Term Rating of “BBB+(lka).”

The initial offering stands at Rs. 2 billion, with an option to extend by an additional Rs. 1.75 billion, bringing the total potential issuance to a maximum of Rs. 3.75 billion. With a five-year tenure, these debentures are poised to offer investors at a fixed interest of 11.50% p.a payable annually (AER 11.50%). .

The proceeds from this issuance are apportioned for the expansion of Siyapatha Financ PLC ‘s lending portfolio, highlighting the company’s commitment to fostering sustainable growth and strategic investment opportunities in alignment with its long-term vision.

“As Siyapatha Finance PLC reaffirms its commitment to fostering financial inclusivity and driving economic growth in Sri Lanka, we’re confident that this will enable us to continue providing innovative and sustainable financial solutions to our valued customers,” stated Mr. Mathisha Hewavitharana, Chief Executive Officer of Siyapatha Finance PLC.

Established in 2005 and regulated by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL), Siyapatha Finance PLC has garnered and secured a reputation as a premier finance company, renowned for its commitment to excellence and customer-centric financial solutions. With a dedicated team of over 1,200 professionals, the company has expanded its footprint to encompass 61 branches strategically located across the island.

Lanka Business TV’s “Wiyawasayakaya” Business and Investment Summit in Galle

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.