Japan to host 60th ADB Annual Meeting in 2027

ADB President Masato Kanda delivers remarks at the Future Host Country Event (Aichi-Nagoya 2027)

Japan will host the Asian Development Bank’s (ADB) 60th Annual Meeting in Aichi-Nagoya from 2-5 May. The event will mark the ADB’s 60th anniversary and celebrate a six-decade partnership that dates back to the bank’s inception.

ADB President Masato Kanda said: “It is fitting to mark six decades of partnership and transformation in Japan, a founding member and one of our largest shareholders. The 60th Annual Meeting will be more than a celebration. It will be a moment to look to the future. I have high expectations for great success at this milestone event.”

The Future Host Country Event, which showcased the tradition, culture, and high technology of Aichi-Nagoya, was held at the ADB’s Annual Meeting in Samarkand. It was joined by Japanese Finance Deputy Vice Minister – International Affairs Shuichi Hosoda, Nagoya City Mayor Ichiro Hirosawa, and Aichi Prefecture Vice Governor Shinichiro Furumoto. During the Samarkand meeting, Japanese Finance Minister Satsuki Katayama assumed the role of Chair of the Board of Governors for the upcoming year.

Themed ‘Forging Partnerships, Driving Transformation,’ the Aichi-Nagoya meeting will provide a platform to reflect on Asia and the Pacific’s remarkable progress since the ADB was established in Manila in December 1966, and to discuss the future of the region.

The Annual Meeting is the ADB’s premier gathering, providing an opportunity for Governors from the ADB’s members to discuss the complex development challenges facing Asia and the Pacific while offering guidance on the bank’s administrative, financial, and operational directions. Thousands of participants, including finance ministers, central bank governors, private sector leaders, international organisations, civil society, and media regularly join the meeting.

Japan’s longstanding commitment to the ADB is reflected in its history of hosting the Annual Meeting every decade since the inaugural gathering in Tokyo in 1966, with the most recent one being in Yokohama in 2017. Beyond hosting, Japan remains a cornerstone of the ADB’s operational capacity, serving as one of the bank’s largest shareholders. Furthermore, Japan has contributed and committed significant resources to the ADB’s trust funds. This includes the Japan Fund for Prosperous and Resilient Asia and the Pacific, the bank’s largest single-donor trust fund, which drives critical poverty reduction and social development activities across the region.